<header id=011247>
Published Date: 2008-10-24 15:00:35 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Anaplasmosis, human granulocytic - USA: (MN), ex transfusion 2007
Archive Number: 20081024.3362
</header>
<body id=011247>
ANAPLASMOSIS, HUMAN GRANULOCYTIC - USA: (MINNESOTA) ex TRANSFUSION 2007
***********************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Thu 23 Oct 2008
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2007; 57(42): 1145-8 [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5742a1.htm>


_Anaplasma phagocytophilum_, a gram-negative, obligate intracellular
bacterium of neutrophils, causes human anaplasmosis, a tickborne
rickettsial disease formerly known as human granulocytic ehrlichiosis
(1). In November 2007, the Minnesota Department of Health was
contacted about _A. phagocytophilum_ infection in a hospitalized
Minnesota resident who had recently undergone multiple blood
transfusions. Subsequent investigation indicated the infection likely
was acquired through a transfusion of red blood cells. This report
describes the patient's clinical history and the epidemiologic and
laboratory investigations.

Although a previous case of transfusion-transmitted anaplasmosis was
reported (2), this is the first published report in which transfusion
transmission of _A. phagocytophilum_ was confirmed by testing of the
recipient and a donor. Although polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assays provided reliable evidence of transmission in this case, no
cost-effective method for screening blood donors for _A.
phagocytophilum_ exists. Screening donors for a recent history of
tick bite is not likely to be sensitive or specific because such
exposures are common and often not recalled by persons with
anaplasmosis (3). Physicians should consider the possibility of
anaplasmosis in patients who develop post-transfusion acute
thrombocytopenia, especially if accompanied by fever, and should
report suspected transfusion-associated cases to health authorities.

Case report
-----------
The patient, a male aged 68 years with a medical history of chronic
renal insufficiency, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and
corticosteroid therapy, underwent elective knee arthroplasty and
synovectomy on 12 Oct 2007. 3 weeks before his hospitalization, the
patient had traveled to an area where blacklegged ticks (_Ixodes_
spp.) were endemic, but he did not spend time outdoors and had no
known tick bites. Several hours after the procedure, the patient
developed bleeding at the surgical site and associated coagulopathy,
indicated by elevated international normalized ratio (INR) and
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and by decreased fibrinogen and
platelet counts. The extensive hemorrhage required 2 surgical
evacuations of hematoma from the knee, popliteal artery embolization,
and transfusion of multiple blood components.

During 12-21 Oct 2007, the patient received 34 units of
nonleukoreduced red blood cells (RBC), 4 units of leukocyte-reduced
apheresis platelets, 14 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and 7
units of cryoprecipitate. The components came from 59 individual
blood donors; all donations were collected by Memorial Blood Centers
(St. Paul, Minnesota). On 19 Oct 2007, the patient developed sepsis
and multisystem failure. He was treated empirically with antibiotics
(cefazolin, piperacillin/tazobactam, vancomycin, and levofloxacin).
Blood cultures were negative on 18, 20, and 31 Oct 2007, and urine
cultures were negative on 19 and 25 Oct 2007.

On 31 Oct 2007, the patient was found to have worsening
thrombocytopenia. His platelet count declined from 178 000/cmm on
that day to 54 000/cmm on 5 Nov 2007. On 1 Nov 2008, he developed
hypotension and fever attributed to urinary tract infection. He was
treated with levofloxacin and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim and was
afebrile by 3 Nov 2007. On 3 Nov 2007, 22 days after admission, a
peripheral blood smear from the patient demonstrated inclusions
compatible with _A. phagocytophilum_ morulae in neutrophils.
Retrospective review of a 15 Oct 2007 blood smear from the patient
showed no evidence of intracellular morulae. Whole blood specimens
from 3-5 Nov 2007 were positive for _A. phagocytophilum_ DNA by PCR
assays conducted at the Mayo Medical Laboratory, Minnesota Department
of Health, and CDC (US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention).
Serum from 3-5 Nov 2007 was tested at CDC and found to be weakly
positive by indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) (titer 1:64) for
immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies to _A. phagocytophilum_.
Doxycycline treatment was begun on 5 Nov 2007. The patient's platelet
count steadily improved and returned to a normal level of 163 000/cmm
on 10 Nov 2008. Pretransfusion blood samples and serum from the
patient's convalescence period were not available for further
testing. The patient improved clinically and was transferred to a
rehabilitation unit on 13 Nov 2008. After rehabilitation, the patient
was discharged on 3 Dec 2007.

Epidemiologic and laboratory investigation
------------------------------------------
In early November 2008, Memorial Blood Centers began an investigation
to identify whether any of the 59 blood donors associated with the 34
RBC, 4 platelet, 14 FFP, and 7 cryoprecipitate units had evidence of
_A. phagocytophilum_ infection. Paired whole blood specimens from the
original donations had been retained from all 34 RBC donors and 8 of
14 FFP donors and were available for PCR testing. During Nov 2007-Mar
2008, Memorial Blood Centers also collected postdonation blood
samples for serologic testing and information on recent illness
history and potential tick exposure from 53 of the 59 donors. In
addition, plasma components from 2 FFP donors and 2 cryoprecipitate
donors who donated again during December 2007-January 2008 were
retained for serologic testing. The whole blood specimens retained
from initial donation were tested by PCR, followed by sequencing of
the PCR amplicons at CDC. Serum and plasma specimens were tested by
IFA for IgG antibodies to _A. phagocytophilum_.

PCR and IFA tests on samples from a female RBC donor aged 64 years
were positive for _A. phagocytophilum_ infection (Table [for table,
see source URL - Mod.LL]). _A. phagocytophilum_ DNA was found in an
RBC product donated by this woman on 28 Sep 2007 and transfused to
the patient on 13 Oct 2007. IgG IFA titers to _A. phagocytophilum_
were 1:512 and 1:256, respectively, in subsequent sera collected 17
Nov 2007 and 18 Dec 2007. The donor did not recall being bitten by a
tick, but had spent time in wooded areas of northeast Minnesota where
anaplasmosis is endemic within the month before her donation. She
reported no history of fever during the month before or after her
donation. No other patients received blood components from her
donation.

No whole blood samples from other tested donors were PCR positive for
_A. phagocytophilum_. Sera from 2 RBC donors were weakly positive by
IFA (titer 1:64), but their respective whole blood samples from the
original transfused units were PCR negative. These 2 donors did not
live on wooded property and reported they had no tick exposure or
illness during the 2 months before donation. Available postdonation
serum samples from other donors were negative for _A.
phagocytophilum_ by IFA (titer less than 1:32).

[Reported by: Kemperman M, Neitzel D, Jensen K, et al]

MMWR editorial note
-------------------
_A. phagocytophilum_, the causative agent of anaplasmosis, typically
is transmitted to humans by infected _Ixodes_ spp. ticks. In wooded
areas of the USA, _A. phagocytophilum_ is transmitted by the
blacklegged tick (_Ixodes scapularis_) in the Northeast and upper
Midwest and by the western blacklegged tick (_Ixodes pacificus_) on
the West Coast. In infected persons who are symptomatic, illness
onset occurs 5-21 days after a bite from an infected tick. Initial
presentation typically includes sudden onset of fever, headache,
malaise, and myalgia, often accompanied by thrombocytopenia,
leukopenia, and elevated liver transaminases. Severe infections can
include prolonged fever, shock, confusion, seizures, pneumonitis,
renal failure, hemorrhages, opportunistic infections, and death (1).

Anaplasmosis and other tickborne diseases, including human
ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and babesiosis, caused by
_Ehrlichia chaffeensis_ or _Ehrlichia ewingii_, _Rickettsia
rickettsii_, and _Babesia_ spp., respectively, represent a potential
risk for transmission via blood transfusion in the USA (2-6).

The case described in this report provides strong presumptive
evidence that _A. phagocytophilum_ infection in this patient was
acquired through blood transfusion. Pre-transfusion blood samples and
convalescent serum from the transfusion recipient were not available
for PCR or serologic testing to demonstrate conclusively that the
patient was free of _A. phagocytophilum_ infection before his
hospitalization on 12 Oct 2008. However, the patient reported limited
outdoor exposure that might include potential tick contact during the
3 weeks before hospitalization, and a blood smear collected 3 days
after hospital admission showed no evidence of intracellular morulae.
The timing of events and the expected incubation period for
anaplasmosis (5-21 days) suggest that the patient's exposure most
likely occurred during hospitalization. _A. phagocytophilum_ DNA was
found in a retained sample from the implicated RBC product that was
transfused to the recipient, providing strong evidence that this was
the likely route of disease transmission to the blood transfusion
recipient.

Some blood transfusion recipients (i.e., those who are immune
compromised) likely are at increased risk for developing severe
complications associated with tickborne diseases. Both _A.
phagocytophilum_ and _E. chaffeensis_ can survive in refrigerated
RBCs, and possible transfusion-transmission cases have been reported
for anaplasmosis (Minnesota Department of Health, unpublished data,
1998) (2,3,5,6). However, because of the rarity of
transfusion-associated cases, concerns regarding the specificity of
available tests, (none of which are approved by the Food and Drug
Administration), and the economic costs associated with
implementation, the USA blood supply is not routinely screened for
tickborne disease using laboratory methods (7).

As a method to reduce the risk for certain pathogens in blood
products, blood banks often defer donations if the potential donor is
ill at the time of donation. However, persons infected with tickborne
disease might experience mild illness or have asymptomatic infection,
as was the case with the implicated donor in this report (1,3).
Screening donors for a recent history of tick bite is unlikely to
identify high-risk donors, because this type of exposure frequently
is not recalled by persons with anaplasmosis (3). In this case, the
implicated donor did not recall a tick bite, although she did report
contact with wooded habitat in an anaplasmosis-endemic area. Nearly
75 percent of the other blood donors in this investigation reported
similar outdoor contact, making the screening of blood donors for
tick-related exposures poorly predictive for possible infection.
Because _Ehrlichia_ and _Anaplasma_ are associated with white blood
cells, leukoreduction techniques would be expected to reduce the risk
for _Ehrlichia_ and _Anaplasma_ transfusion-transmission through RBC
components (5,8). In the absence of effective screening tools to
identify donors or products infected with the organisms, physicians
should weigh the benefits of using leukoreduced blood components, to
potentially reduce the risk for _Ehrlichia_ and _Anaplasma_
transmissions.

Although transfusion-associated transmission of _A. phagocytophilum_
appears to be rare, reported incidences of anaplasmosis and other
tickborne diseases are increasing in the USA (1). A record 322 cases
of anaplasmosis were reported in Minnesota in 2007 (6.2 cases per 100
000 population) (9). As the incidence of tickborne diseases
increases, physician vigilance for possible transmission of these
agents via transfusions also should increase. In addition to other
more common etiologies, physicians should suspect possible
rickettsial infection if transfusion recipients develop acute
thrombocytopenia posttransfusion, especially if accompanied by fever.
Such signs should lead to rapid assessment for rickettsial agents and
empiric treatment with doxycycline (1). Although insensitive, blood
smear can provide timely support for a presumptive diagnosis of
anaplasmosis, followed by IFA or PCR to confirm the diagnosis (1).
Similarly, babesiosis should be suspected in patients who develop
hemolytic anemia and fever posttransfusion (3,4).

Anaplasmosis and ehrlichiosis are nationally notifiable diseases.
Suspected cases of tickborne rickettsial diseases should be reported
promptly to the state or local health department, and suspected
transfusion-associated transmission should be reported to the
supplying blood center and appropriate public health authorities.

References
----------
1. CDC: Diagnosis and management of tickborne rickettsial diseases:
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, and anaplasmosis---United
States. MMWR 2006; 55: (No.RR-4) [available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5504a1.htm>].
2. Eastlund T, Persing D, Mathiesen D, et al: Human granulocytic
ehrlichiosis after red cell transfusion. Transfusion 1999; 39: 117S.
3. McQuiston JH, Childs JE, Chamberland ME, Tabor E: Transmission of
tickborne agents of disease by blood transfusion: a review of known
and potential risks in the United States. Transfusion 2000; 40:
274-284.
4. Herwaldt BL, Neitzel DF, Gorlin JB, et al: Transmission of
_Babesia microti_ in Minnesota through four blood donations from the
same donor over a 6-month period. Transfusion 2002; 42(9): 1154-8
[abstract available at
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12430672>].
5. McKechnie DB, Slater KS, Childs JE, Massung RF, Paddock CD:
Survival of _Ehrlichia chaffeensis_ in refrigerated, ADSOL-treated
RBCs. Transfusion 2000; 40(9): 1041-7 [abstract available at
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10988303>].
6. Kalantarpour F, Chowdhury I, Wormser GP, Aguero-Rosenfeld ME:
Survival of the human granulocytic ehrlichiosis agent under
refrigeration conditions. J Clin Microbiol 2000; 38(6): 2398-9
[abstract available at
<http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/content/abstract/38/6/2398>].
7. AuBuchon JP: Meeting transfusion safety expectations. Ann Intern
Med 2005; 143: 537-8 [available at
<http://www.annals.org/cgi/reprint/143/7/537.pdf>].
8. Mettille FC, Salata KF, Belanger KJ, Casleton BG, Kelly DJ:
Reducing the risk of transfusion-transmitted rickettsial disease by
WBC filtration, using _Orientia tsutsugamushi_ in a model system.
Transfusion 2000; 40(3): 290-6 [abstract available at
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10738028>].
9. CDC: Final 2007 reports of nationally notifiable infectious
diseases. MMWR 2008; 57: 901, 903-13 [available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5733a6.htm>].

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Any pathogen that spends time, albeit transiently in the blood
stream, may be transmitted by transfusion including prions (most
notably variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) and enteric hepatitis
viruses (both A and E).

One tickborne pathogen not mentioned in the report above that can be
transmitted by transfusion as well is _Borrelia hermsii_, the
spirochete responsible for tickborne relapsing fever. It is
transmitted by _Ornithodoros_ ticks.

A picture of the intracytoplasmic inclusions called morulae due to
_A. phagocytophilum_ can be found at
<http://www.medscape.com/content/2004/00/49/04/490468/art-iim490468.fig1.jpg>.

A photograph of _Ixodes scapularis_ can be seen at
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ixodes_scapularis>. - Mod.LL]
See Also
Anaplasmosis, human granulocytic - Canada: 1st rep., (AB) 20080731.2352
2007
----
Ehrlichiosis, fatal - USA (MO) 20070607.1849
2003
----
Ehrlichiosis, human granulocytic - USA (MA) 20030903.2211
Ehrlichiosis, human monocytic - USA (NC) 20030625.1571
1999
----
Ehrlichiosis, human - Mexico 19990713.1173
1998
----
Ehrlichiosis, human granulocytic - USA (Connecticut) 19980713.1318
Ehrlichiosis, human granulocytic - Sweden 19980418.0719
1995
----
Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (5) 19950802.0625
Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis - Europe? 19950723.0581
........................................ll/mj/jw
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
