<header id=051084>
Published Date: 2011-08-18 09:58:53 EDT
Subject: PRO/PL> Witches' broom, longan - Viet Nam: (Mekong Delta)
Archive Number: 20110818.2503
</header>
<body id=051084>
WITCHES' BROOM, LONGAN - VIET NAM: (MEKONG DELTA)
*************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 15 Aug 2011
Source: Vietnam Today, Vietnam News report [edited]
http://www.dztimes.net/post/social/witches-broom-casts-spell-on-crops.aspx


Witches' broom disease is blighting longan crops around the Cuu Long
(Mekong) Delta [southern most region of Viet Nam including several
provinces], causing disastrous losses to farmers. In the delta, around
11 570 ha [hectares] have been blighted by the disease, figures from
local agriculture departments show.

A farmer in Soc Trang Province said longan was the main fruit in his
area, but a witches' broom epidemic had hit harvests. In Dong Thap
Province famous for longan cultivation, almost the entire 3680 ha of
the crop had been infected, the local Agriculture and Rural
Development Office said. In some communes, most orchards have been
affected reducing longan output by 70 to 90 percent. In Tien Giang,
Vinh Long, and Tra Vinh provinces, the disease has spread rapidly.

Nguyen Minh Chau, Southern Fruit Research Institute, said witches'
broom spread quickly and caused extensive damage. But farmers'
awareness of this disease remained low though his institute had
dispatched officials to educate them about it. Another major concern
was that few farmers had cut down diseased trees and branches, making
it difficult to contain the spread of the disease, he added.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Longan (_Dimocarpus longan_) is an important fruit crop in parts of
Asia. Witches' broom (or rosette shoot) is a serious disease of the
crop with reported yield losses of up to 50 percent. It was first
described from China in 1941 where in some areas up to 100 percent of
trees were infected, with higher incidence in mature trees. Since then
it has also been reported from other countries in the region, for
example Thailand and Taiwan.

Symptoms appear on branches and leaves but not on fruit. They may
include distorted mature leaves, unexpanded young leaves, dense
clusters of shoots, poorly developed flowers, as well as abnormal
development of flowers and panicles resulting in "broom-like"
appearance of the inflorescences. Similar symptoms have been reported
from litchi and a close relationship between the 2 diseases is
indicated.

The disease is still considered to be of unconfirmed aetiology, but is
suspected to be caused by a filamentous virus transmitted by vectors
such as litchi stink bug (_Tessaratoma papillosa_), longan psyllid
(_Cornegenapsylla sinica_), and a new species of gall mite (_Eriophes
dimocarpi_). The disease is also spread through grafting, and
preliminary evidence suggests that it may be seed transmitted. Disease
management may include orchard sanitation (removal of potential
pathogen reservoirs), phytosanitary measures (disinfecting cutting
tools), and use of clean planting and grafting material. Resistant
crop varieties are available for some areas.

The term "witches' broom" is descriptive of symptoms only and is
associated with a range of plant diseases caused by different
pathogens.

Maps
Viet Nam and neighbours:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/middle_east_and_asia/vietnam_pol01.jpg
and
http://healthmap.org/r/01CY
Viet Nam provinces:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:VietnameseProvincesMap.png

Pictures
Witches' broom symptoms on longan flower spikes:
http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/x6908e/x6908e09.jpg
Healthy longan:
http://www.bijlmakers.com/fruits/longan/longan_fruits_in_tree.jpg
(fruit),
http://www.bijlmakers.com/fruits/longan/longan_flowers.jpg
(flowers), and
http://www.fruitipedia.com/Longan%20tree%204.jpg (tree)

Links
Longan witches' broom information via:
http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/x6908e/x6908e0c.htm#b7-10.7%20Pests%20and%20Diseases,
http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0014/164003/ll_final_a.pdf,
and
http://www.agnet.org/library/eb/417b/
Research on cause and spread of longan witches' broom:
http://www.actahort.org/books/558/558_66.htm,
http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTOTAL-ZBDX402.008.htm, and
http://www.actahort.org/books/558/558_65.htm
Information on longan cultivation and diseases (with pictures):
http://www.bijlmakers.com/fruits/longan.htm,
http://www.tradewindsfruit.com/longan.htm, and
http://www.fruitipedia.com/longan_dimocarpus_longan.htm. - Mod.DHA]

.................................................dha/mj/mpp
</body>
