<header id=008397>
Published Date: 2011-06-20 11:44:35 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Genital chlamydia infection - Denmark: increase
Archive Number: 20110620.1886
</header>
<body id=008397>
GENITAL CHLAMYDIA INFECTION - DENMARK: INCREASE
***********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 17 Jun 2011
Source: The Copenhagen Post Online [edited]
http://www.cphpost.dk/news/scitech/92-technology/51822-chlamydia-outbreak.html


Health authorities estimate that as many as 1 in 10 sexually active
young Danes have [genital _Chlamydia trachomatis_ infection, also
referred to as simply] chlamydia -- many without knowing it. In the
last 9 years the number of reported cases of the sexually transmitted
disease chlamydia has doubled to more than 30 000 cases, reports the
National Board of Health, amounting to an epidemic of the illness.

Chlamydia is now the most widespread sexually transmitted disease in
Denmark, largely because many people do not know that they are
infected and a large proportion of young people have unprotected sex.
"We are seeing a huge rise in chlamydia and genital warts [due to
human papilloma virus or HPV], and every year many men and women get
cancer [persistent infection with one of about 14 genotypes of HPVs is
the primary cause of cervical cancer and is also the cause of some
cancers of the anus, vulva, vagina, penis, and oropharynx] or become
infertile [due to _Chlamydia trachomatis_ infection] because of
sexually transmitted diseases," Susanne Bjerregaard, of the Centre for
Sex and Health, told metroXpress newspaper.

The Board of Health now reports that it has nearly 500 registered
cases of young people who have irreversibly lost their ability to have
children because of complications from untreated chlamydia.

Some 50 to 70 per cent of women with chlamydia show no symptoms --
but they can still spread the infection, which is transmitted through
vaginal, anal, and oral sex. Sex without condoms and multiple partners
are risk factors for the infection which, left untreated, can cause
infertility and blindness. [Blindness is more commonly caused by a
disease called trachoma, which is due to infection with serovars of
_Chlamydia trachomatis_ that are different from the serovars that
cause genital chlamydial infection. See comments below.]

A study by the Swedish Association for Sexuality Education (RFSU)
released last month [May 2011] reported that 31 per cent of Danes
"often" had unprotected sex, while some 55 per cent "never" used
condoms. The National Board of Health along with Frederiksberg Council
will now collaborate on an information campaign to teach young people
about the symptoms and consequences of untreated chlamydia. In
addition, free chlamydia test kits will be offered, so that people can
test themselves at home for the infection.

"Young people pay attention when they learn that they can be
permanently damaged if chlamydia goes untreated. Once they know what
their options are, they are generally interested in getting tested,"
Bjarne Rasmussen of the Frederiksberg Council told Berlingske
newspaper.

But Bjarne B Christensen from the Danish Family Planning Association
suggested that a culture of safer sex was necessary and could only
come through an organised state strategy. "Education and information
campaigns aren't enough," he told metroXpress last month [May 2011]
when the RFSU study about spotty condom use was released. "It's a
problem that Denmark doesn't have a collective policy about sexual
health."

[byline: Jennifer Buley]

--
communicated by:
HealthMap Alerts via ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Chlamydia are obligate intracellular bacteria that rely on host cell
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) for energy production. Chlamydia have 2
forms: a non-replicating, infectious elementary body, analogous to a
spore, and a replicating, non-infectious reticulate body. The
elementary body induces its own endocytosis upon attachment to host
cells, within which the elementary body converts to the replicating
reticulate form. Up to several hundred progeny are produced within a
large cytoplasmic inclusion. The reticulate body then reverts back to
the elementary form and is released by the cell through exocytosis.
_Chlamydia trachomatis_ is transmitted through infected secretions,
and mainly infects columnar epithelial cells, particularly in the
cervix, rectum, urethra, throat, and conjunctiva.

Within the _C. trachomatis_ species, there are multiple serovars. The
diseases caused by _C. trachomatis_ depend on the serovar: serovars A,
B, Ba, and C cause trachoma; serovars D through K cause genital and
perinatal infections; and serovars L1, L2, and L3 cause
lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV).

Trachoma, transmitted through eye discharge or contact with
eye-seeking flies, causes chronic conjunctivitis. Conjunctival
scarring forces the eyelid to turn inward, where eye lashes can rub
the cornea, causing corneal opacification.

Genital chlamydial infection is the most frequently reported
bacterial sexually transmitted disease in the United States, and
similar to Denmark its prevalence in the US in sexually active
adolescent females is between 5 per cent and 15 per cent
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6012a2.htm). An
estimated 2.8 million infections occur annually in the US
(http://www.cdc.gov/std/chlamydia/STDFact-Chlamydia.htm). During
2007, about 1.1 million cases of chlamydia were reported to CDC; more
than half of these were in females aged 15-25 years
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5814a2.htm). Women are
frequently reinfected if their sex partners are not treated. The
period of communicability may extend for months or longer if
untreated, especially in people without symptoms. Asymptomatic
infection occurs in the majority of both males and females. These
asymptomatic individuals serve as a large reservoir for transmission
of _C. trachomatis_. Risk factors include unprotected sex with an
infected partner and multiple partners. Sexually active adolescent
women are thought to be particularly at risk because of cervical
ectopy, that is, columnar epithelial cells on the ectocervix.

Genital chlamydial infection in men can cause urethritis (dysuria and
urethral discharge) and epididymitis, and infection in women can cause
urethritis, cervicitis, endometritis, and salpingitis that can
progress to pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), infertility, ectopic
pregnancy, and chronic pelvic pain, if untreated. Symptoms usually
begin 2 to 6 weeks after infection. Chlamydial proctitis can result
from direct inoculation of the rectum in either men or women through
anal intercourse or secondary spread of secretions from the cervix in
women. Transmission to the neonate may occur during delivery by
exposure to the mother's infected cervix. As a result, perinatal
chlamydial inclusion conjunctivitis may develop at 5 to 12 days after
birth and pneumonia at 1 to 3 months of age. Genital chlamydial
infection also increases the risk of acquiring human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection.

Because of the asymptomatic nature, high prevalence, and possible
adverse long term reproductive effects of genital chlamydial
infection, the US CDC, the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF),
and professional medical associations recommend routine annual
chlamydia screening for all sexually active females aged 25 years or
younger and for females older than 25 years if they are at increased
risk for infection (such as, if they have new or multiple sex
partners) (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6012a2.htm).
However, fewer than half of young, sexually active females in the
United States are screened for chlamydia: nationally, the annual
screening rate increased from 25.3 per cent in 2000 to 43.6 per cent
in 2006, and then decreased slightly to 41.6 per cent in 2007
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5814a2.htm). Male
partners of females infected with genital chlamydial infection have
the highest prevalence of infection and should be the top priority for
chlamydia testing and treatment efforts among males
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6012a2.htm).

Nucleic acid amplification tests are the preferred diagnostic tests
for chlamydia because of their superior sensitivity, and they can be
performed on easily collected specimens, such as urine or vaginal
swabs (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6012a2.htm).
Highly efficacious treatment options include single-dose oral
azithromycin or a 1-week course of doxycycline.

Because patients infected with _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ frequently are
co-infected with _Chlamydia trachomatis_, patients treated for
gonococcal infection should also be treated routinely with a regimen
that is effective against genital _C. trachomatis_ infection. For
uncomplicated gonococcal infections of the cervix, urethra, and
rectum, recommended treatments are 250 mg of ceftriaxone in a single
intramuscular (IM) dose or 400 mg of cefixime [now available in the
US, see http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5716a5.htm] in a
single oral dose, plus [treatment of chlamydia] azithromycin 1g orally
in a single dose or doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days
(http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/gonococcal-infections.htm).

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for Denmark is available at
http://healthmap.org/r/00ux. - Mod.ML]
See Also
Antibiotic resistance: Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA (CA) azithromycin 20110613.1800
.................................................ml/mj/sh
</body>
