<header id=034585>
Published Date: 2011-09-20 18:47:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Poliomyelitis - worldwide (13): Kenya, China, Pakistan
Archive Number: 20110920.2860
</header>
<body id=034585>
POLIOMYELITIS - WORLDWIDE (13): KENYA, CHINA, PAKISTAN
******************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] Kenya - Western Province
[2] China - Xinjiang province, 7 cases
[3] China - 9 cases
[4] China ex Pakistan - WHO confirmation
[5] Pakistan - Baluchistan

******
[1] Kenya - Western Province
Date: 19 Sep 2011
Source: AlertNet / IRIN [edited]
http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/kenya-thousands-of-children-to-be-immunized-amid-polio-outbreak


Thousands of children to be immunized amid polio outbreak
----------------
Health officials are on high alert after 3 cases of the Wild Polio
Virus Type 1 were recently recorded in western Kenya.

"Even if one case is detected, it is considered an outbreak as the
virus can spread really fast," Shahnaaz Sharif, the Director of Public
Health and Sanitation, told IRIN.

The virus, detected in 3 children in the Kamagambo area of Rongo
District, Western Province [according to multiple maps this moderator
has consulted, Kamagambo and Rongo District are located in Nyanza
Province - Mod.MPP], is similar to one found in Uganda's Bugiri
District in 2010, according to Sharif.

The virus is most commonly associated with paralysis, and on average,
one person in every 200 infected develops irreversible paralysis
usually of the lower limbs, said Sharif.

Though polio is targeted for eradication in Kenya, there have been
sporadic outbreaks, with cases reported in the northern Garissa and
Turkana districts in 2006 and 2009, respectively.

The outbreaks were linked to ongoing polio circulation in neighbouring
Somalia and Southern Sudan, according to the Ministry of Public Health
and Sanitation.

In 2009-2010, 23 previously polio-free countries were re-infected due
to imports of the virus, according to the UN World Health
Organization.

"Polio is big to fight against but the government and other
stakeholders will do all [they] can in a bid to eradicate this deadly
virus," said Sharif.

A massive immunization campaign is planned in Rongo and neighbouring
Homabay, Kisii, Kisumu, Nyamira, Migori and Transmara districts.

"We are targeting at least 1.8 million children aged below 5 years as
we do not want to take [the] chances of letting the virus spread even
further," he said. "There are 200 carriers in every one case
detected."

Epidemiologists have also been dispatched to the region to sensitize
health workers about the virus, with parents being urged to seek
medical care for children with symptoms such as fever, fatigue,
vomiting and stiffness in the neck.

Polio is preventable through a vaccine given multiple times.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Of note in the above newswire is that the wild poliovirus type 1
(WPV1) identified in the current cases in Western Kenya are similar
genotypically to the WPV1 identified in a case in Bugiri Uganda in
October 2010 (see prior ProMED-mail post Poliomyelitis - worldwide
(23): Uganda 20101027.3900 for information on the WPV1 identified in
Bugiri Uganda in 2010).

At that time, the WPV1 identified was genotypically similar to the
WPV1 isolated in a case in Turkana in NorthWest Kenya (see prior
ProMED-EAFR post Poliomyelitis, wild type - Kenya (Turkana) 20090914.202049 for information on the WPV1 transmission in Turkana,
Kenya in 2009). At that time (2009 in Turkana Kenya), the WPV1
isolated was genotypically similar to WPV1 circulating in Southern
Sudan (see
http://www.publichealth.go.ke/index2.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&gid=41&Itemid=94
for the Minister of Public Health and Sanitation, Kenya statement on
the outbreak in Turkana in 2009).

Of note is that the Sudan had been polio free in 2002 and 2003. WPV
was re-introduced to Sudan from Nigeria in 2004, with extensive
transmission in 2004-2005, no cases in 2006, one case in 2007, and
since 2008 has had continuous transmission of WPV). (see prior
ProMED-mail post Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (02): Kenya, Uganda ex
Sudan 20090226.0808 for information on the WPV transmission in Sudan,
and data extracted from the Polio Eradication Initiative database
http://apps.who.int/immunization_monitoring/en/diseases/poliomyelitis/afpextract.cfm).

Hence, the events ongoing in Kenya, Uganda and the Sudan are a
reflection of the fragile situation faced by countries following
interruption of transmission of WPV when the WPV is still circulating
in other areas. The need to maintain high vaccination coverages to
prevent reintroduction of WPV transmission in an area is evident, but
a significant resource challenge for many areas. In the above
situation, the civil strife ongoing in the Sudan further complicated
the situation.

For a map of Kenya showing provinces, see
http://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/map/kenya_map2.htm. For the
interactive HealthMap/ProMED map showing the location of Kamagamba
Kenya, see http://healthmap.org/r/1g0l. - Mod.MPP]

******
[2] China - Xinjiang province, 7 cases
Date: 20 Sep 2011
Source: USA Today [edited]
http://yourlife.usatoday.com/health/story/2011-09-20/WHO-Polio-strain-spreads-to-China-from-Pakistan/50479722/1


WHO: Polio strain spreads to China from Pakistan
------------------------------------------------
The World Health Organization has warned countries that a 'dangerous'
strain of polio has spread to China from Pakistan.

The U.N. health agency says a genetic link has been confirmed between
wild poliovirus type 1 detected in China and a strain circulating in
Pakistan. It says there have been 7 confirmed cases involving the WPV1
strain detected in China's Xinjiang province, which borders Pakistan,
in the past 2 months.

WHO spokesman Oliver Rosenbauer says type 1 is more dangerous than
type 3 because it is more likely to cause paralysis and spreads more
easily. Type 2 polio has been eradicated [The last wild poliovirus
type 2 isolated was from Aligarh, Western Uttar Pradesh, in October
1999. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5013a5.htm and
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5012a2.htm from Apparent
Global Interruption of Wild Poliovirus Type 2 Transmission. MMWR. 30
Mar 2001. 50(12);222-4 - Mod.MPP]

The global health body says countries should strengthen their disease
surveillance systems and travellers to Pakistan should be vaccinated
against polio.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[In the last ProMED-mail post on this outbreak (Poliomyelitis -
worldwide (12): WHO China, Kenya 20110902.2683) there had been 4
confirmed cases of polio with dates of onset between 3 and 27 Jul
2011. The above report now increases the number of involved cases to
7, suggesting more widespread transmission of the WPV in the affected
area. Noteworthy in this outbreak is that the WPV associated with this
outbreak is genotypically similar to the WPV currently circulating in
Pakistan, one of the 4 remaining polio endemic countries in the
world.

For a map of China showing provinces and demonstrating the shared
border of Xinjiang Autonomous Region with Pakistan, see
http://www.sacu.org/provmap.html. For the interactive
HealthMap/ProMED map of Xinjiang Autonomous Region China, see
http://healthmap.org/r/1g0m. - Mod.MPP]

******
[3] China - 9 cases
Date: 20 Sep 2011
Source: Reuters [edited]
http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/09/20/us-polio-china-idUSTRE78J48320110920


WHO reports polio outbreak in China, warns of spread
----------------------------------------------------
Polio has broken out in China for the 1st time since 1999 after being
imported from Pakistan, and there is a high risk of the crippling
virus spreading further during the annual Haj pilgrimage, the World
Health Organization said on Tuesday [20 Sep 2011].

A total of 9 cases have been confirmed in China, and polio is now
considered to have spread nationwide in Pakistan, mainly due to
insecurity that has halted vaccination campaigns in areas including
the Khyber tribal region, a WHO spokesman said.

"The WHO rates as 'high' the risk of further international spread of
wild polio virus from Pakistan, particularly given the expected
large-scale population movements associated with Umra and the upcoming
Haj...in the coming months," the Geneva-based body said in a
statement.

Haj is the main annual Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia,
which is due to start in November. Umra refers to other pilgrimages to
Mecca, which can take place any time of the year.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The above article rightly points out concerns about the upcoming Haj,
although the Saudi government requires proof of polio vaccination
(among other vaccinations) for entry to Saudi Arabia for the Haj. -
Mod.MPP]

******
[4]China ex Pakistan - WHO confirmation
Date: 20 Sep 2011
Source: WHO Global Alert and Response
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2011_09_20/en/index.html


Confirmed international spread of wild poliovirus from Pakistan
----------------
Wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) genetically linked to virus currently
circulating in Pakistan has been isolated in China. Pakistan is
affected by nationwide transmission of WPV1, and is the location of
the only wild poliovirus type 3 (WPV3) case in Asia in 2011 (a strain
on the verge of elimination on the continent). As [of] 13 Sep 2011,
Pakistan had reported 84 cases, compared to 48 cases for the same
period in 2010.

In 2011, supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) in Pakistan have
been inadequate in quality in key high-risk areas. In
security-compromised parts of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas
(FATA), and in particular in Khyber agency, upwards of 200 000
children have been regularly missed during SIAs conducted during the
last 2 years. In addition to challenges relating to reaching children
in insecure areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and FATA, significant
operational challenges continue to mar the quality of SIAs in
accessible areas of Khyber and in other key transmission areas of the
country, notably in the provinces of Balochistan and Sindh. At the
same time, undetected circulation cannot be ruled out due to
persistent subnational surveillance gaps. Given these factors, the
widespread transmission of WPV1, documented spread internationally,
and the detection of the only WPV3 in Asia in 2011, the World Health
Organization (WHO) rates as 'high' the risk of further international
spread of WPV from Pakistan, particularly given the expected
large-scale population movements associated with Umrah and the
upcoming Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) in the
coming months.

To urgently address the widespread transmission of wild poliovirus
affecting the country, the Government of Pakistan has this year
launched a National Polio Emergency Action Plan, under the auspices
His Excellency the President. However, the impact of the Plan is not
yet being seen at the critical programme implementation level. To
rapidly build up population immunity levels to both serotypes,
staggered subnational immunization days are planned for [19-21 Sep
2011], to be closely followed by further activities in high-risk union
councils in 54 districts of the country. However, key to success will
be to overcome remaining operational challenges in fully-accessible
areas and implemented special outreach strategies with full community
participation to increase access to populations in
security-compromised areas. To achieve this, full and consistent
engagement and accountability at provincial, district and
union-council level is urgently needed.

It is important that countries across Asia and the Eastern
Mediterranean strengthen disease surveillance for acute flaccid
paralysis (AFP), in order to rapidly detect any poliovirus
importations and facilitate a rapid response should importation occur.
Countries should also continue to boost routine immunization coverage
against all strains of polio to minimize the consequences of any
introduction.

As per recommendations outlined in WHO's International travel and
health, travellers to and from Pakistan should be fully protected by
vaccination. Travellers to Pakistan who have in the past received 3 or
more doses of OPV should be offered another dose of polio vaccine
before departure. Any unimmunized individuals intending to travel to
Pakistan should complete a full course of vaccination. Travellers from
Pakistan should have a full course of vaccination against polio before
leaving Pakistan, with a minimum one dose of OPV before departure.
Some polio-free countries may also require travellers from Pakistan to
be immunized against polio in order to obtain an entry visa.

With Hajj and Umrah season already started, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia has issued vaccination requirements for travellers (all ages)
for Umrah and Hajj. These requirements are in line with
recommendations outlined in WHO's International travel and health,
with the addition that travellers of all ages from polio endemic
countries are required to show proof of vaccination with OPV 6 weeks
before travel to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and will receive a
further dose of OPV upon their arrival.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp

[The above report is confirmation of the event covered in the above
newswires, and further accentuates the challenges faced in by the
polio eradication initiative. See additional moderator comments below
as well for more discussion. - Mod.MPP]

******
[5] Pakistan - Baluchistan
Date: 20 Sep 2011
Source: Daily Times [edited]
http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011%5C09%5C20%5Cstory_20-9-2011_pg7_26


Polio cases at all-time high in Balochistan
-------------------------------------------
Two more cases of polio were detected in Pishin and Loralai districts
raising the total number of polio cases in Balochistan in this year to
37.

The polio virus had been detected in a 12-month-old [male], resident
of Ghasiabad in Tehsil Dukki of Loralai district, and [another male
child], resident of Union Council Karbala in Pishin. Officials from
the polio control programme and Balochistan Health Department
confirmed both cases. "It was the 9th polio case to be detected in
Pishin district and the majority of the polio cases were from Kila
Abdullah district, where 13 cases have been reported," officials
said.

"After the emergence of fresh cases, the number of children suffering
from polio rose to 37 - a high number as compared to other parts of
Pakistan," UNICEF Immunisation Programme Communication Officer Jawahir
Habib said, adding that at least 89 cases of polio had been reported
so far across the country and that Balochistan was considered to be
the worst-affected. "The virus is spreading fast in the northern areas
of Balochistan," an official of the polio control programme said. "We
can say that the province is in the grip of poliovirus [circulation]
and adequate measures are desperately needed to control this spreading
virus."

Jawahir Habib of UNICEF expressed concern and said that the virus had
spread to previously unaffected Kalat, Kohlu, Khuzdar, Noshki, Loralai
and Dera Bugti. "Around 1.5 million children below the age of 5 in
Balochistan are at risk of polio infection due to the current
outbreak. Balochistan hits number one position with the highest number
of polio cases in the country," she added.

As many as 13 children were infected by the polio virus in Kila
Abdullah, 9 in Pishin, 5 in Quetta, 3 in Khuzdar, 3 in Naushki, one in
Kolhu Kalat, Loralai and Dera Bugti each. Health officials fear that
the figure may rise in coming days and blamed parents who were
reluctant to administer their children polio vaccination.

A 6-day anti-polio drive was kicked off across the province on Monday
[19 Sep 2011] during which children below the age of 5 will be
administered an anti-polio vaccine.

[Byline: Mohammad Zafar]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[As mentioned above, Pakistan is one of the 4 remaining polio endemic
countries in the world. Baluchistan (Balochistan) is considered a
resource poor province in the country and can be found on a map at
http://www.nationsonline.org/maps/pakistan_map.jpg. The province
shares borders with Iran and Afghanistan, the latter also being a
polio endemic country. For the HealthMap/ProMED map of Baluchistan
Pakistan, see http://healthmap.org/r/1g0n.

As mentioned in the above newswire, there have been 84 cases of polio
confirmed in Pakistan thus far this year. This represents an increase
in 25 cases in the past 6 weeks (see ProMED-mail post Poliomyelitis -
worldwide (09): India, Pakistan, Nigeria 20110808.2402).

The common theme in the above events is the continued cross border
transmission of the WPV in both Africa and Asia. And more importantly
the continued "silent" transmission of the WPV in these areas. In the
case of the events in East Africa, there was introduction of WPV from
Nigeria into the Sudan in 2004, following which there was known
transmission in 2004 and 2005 (known transmission defined as paralytic
cases were identified associated with the WPV transmission in Sudan.
No cases were identified in 2006, and then cases occurred again in
2007 through to the present. In 2009, there were cases in Kenya and
Uganda genotypically related to the WPV known to be circulating in the
southern Sudan at that time. Another year went by and in 2010 a case
in Uganda appeared, genotypically similar to those seen in Kenya in
2009. Again, another year has gone by and in 2011 there are cases in
Kenya genotypically similar to the WPV identified in the 2010 case in
Uganda.

The paralytic to non-paralytic ratio for WPV infection is considered
to be an average of one paralytic case for every 200 persons infected
with the WPV. The range of this ratio is from a high of one paralytic
case per every 50 persons infected with WPV to a low of one paralytic
case per every 1000 persons infected with WPV. Is the situation in
East Africa related to a WPV that has a one per 1000 paralytic to
non-paralytic ratio where it takes approximately one year to infect
1000 individuals resulting in the one paralytic case that leads to a
heightened vaccination response in the affected area? Or is the
situation that there are paralytic cases that are being missed by the
surveillance efforts. Will the endgame for polio eradication include
the more labor intensive (and costly) need for increased environmental
sampling for WPV in remote areas to detect areas with silent
transmission of the WPV? - Mod.MPP]
See Also
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (12): WHO China, Kenya 20110902.2683
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (11): China 20110827.2625
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (09): India, Pakistan, Nigeria 20110808.2402
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (08): Chad, Pakistan 20110611.1776
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (07): update 20110512.1462
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (05): Cote d'Ivoire, Pakistan 20110421.1248
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (04): Pakistan, Nigeria, World 20110407.1087
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (03): Rep. Congo, Pakistan, Africa 20110323.0919
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (02): Congo DR, Angola, Pakistan 20110227.0650
Poliomyelitis - worldwide: India (WB) 20110218.0532
2010
----
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (29): India (Delhi) sewage 20101207.4372
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (25): importation related 20101104.3994
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (24): Africa, WHO-AFRO 20101103.3978
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (23): Uganda 20101027.3900
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide 20100125.0280
2009
----
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (06): Uganda 20090601.2035
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (05) 20090521.1905
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (04): Importations Africa 20090417.1454
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (03): Sudan, Angola 20090305.0900
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (02): Kenya, Uganda ex Sudan 20090226.0808
.................................................sb/mpp/ejp/mpp/ml
</body>
