<header id=017723>
Published Date: 2011-12-31 06:05:54 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Schmallenberg virus - Europe (11): Netherlands, update
Archive Number: 20111231.3713
</header>
<body id=017723>
SCHMALLENBERG VIRUS - EUROPE (11): NETHERLANDS, UPDATE
******************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 30 Dec 2011
Source: Press release, Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture
and Innovation - a letter from the Minister to the Chair of the Dutch
Parliament [in Dutch, trans. Mod.AS, summarised, edited]
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl/bestanden/documenten-en-publicaties/kamerstukken/2011/12/30/ontwikkelingen-schmallenbergvirus-30-12-2011/ontwikkelingen-schmallenbergvirus-30-12-2011.pdf


Schmallenberg virus - recent developments, 30 Dec 2011
------------------------------------------------------
As promised in my letter of 21 Dec 2011 (TK 29 683, 108), I would wish
to provide you with enclosed information about the latest developments
regarding the Schmallenberg virus [SBV].

To gain more insight into the magnitude and the (geographical)
distribution of the problems caused by SBV, I put in place, on 20 Dec
2011, a reporting requirement for farmers and veterinarians. They must
report to the Netherlands' New Food and Consumer Product Safety
Authority (nVWA) all malformed newborn ruminants.

Reports on congenital malformations, which may be indicative of
infection with SBV, have been, as of 30 Dec 2011, submitted to the
Dutch authorities from 108 farms (40 cattle, 67 sheep, and one goat
farm) [situated in all 12 provinces. The highest number of
notifications came from the mid-eastern provinces Overijssel and
Gelderland; see comments and map].

As of 30 Dec 2011, SBV has been demonstrated in 27 of the 67 sheep
samples (30 still under investigation) and none of the 40 cattle
samples (16 found negative, 24 still under investigation). The single
goat sample is still under investigation.

The fact that the virus has not been established on 26 farms does not
exclude SBV infection, since the infection could have occurred during
early stages of gestation. A test to detect antibodies against the
virus, which may definitely exclude infection, is not yet available
and is under development. When available and applied, the number of
positive farms may rise.

At my request, the nVWA has published a summary of the findings on
their website [see URL in the commentary below].

Situation in Europe
-------------------
In Germany, the virus has now been found in a deformed calf; Belgium
has found 5 farms in Flanders as SBV positive. The Chief Veterinary
Officers (CVO's) from France, Luxembourg and the United Kingdom have
indicated that they have no abnormalities reported. Though in these
counties, the situation is being closely followed, Netherlands is
currently the only country which has set a formal reporting
requirement. This has, probably, provided the Netherlands with the
best insight into the current disease situation.

Public health
-------------
The Dutch National Institute for Health and Environment (RIVM) has
performed an analysis of the potential risk for humans [See
ProMED-mail post 20111221.3645]. Based on all available information,
the experts concluded on 21 Dec 2011 that transmission of the virus to
humans cannot be excluded but is very unlikely. This analysis has now
also been adopted by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control (ECDC). The Ministry of Health (VWS) and RIVM keep
developments closely monitored as a precaution and are closely
involved in the extension study.

In this context, farmers, veterinarians and others who have had direct
contact with deformed-born animals have been guided to contact the
health authorities in case of any unusual health-related problems [see
comment].

The phenomena we observe are the result of an infection which probably
took place several months ago. The options for prevention and control
are, therefore, currently very limited.

In addition, since the virus has not yet been isolated, little is yet
known about its introduction, infection and dissemination route(s). I,
therefore, have now set up future scientific research on the diagnosis
(based on the demonstration of antibodies), epidemiology (introduction
and spread), vaccine development and virus characterisation (research
project TK 29683, nr. 108). The researchers include the Animal Health
Service (GD), the Central Veterinary Institute (CVI), and RIVM, in
close contact with their German colleagues. I have also asked
Commissioner Dalli for European support for this research.

Transparent national information exchange
-----------------------------------------
As the reports from Germany and Belgium show, this problem is not
exclusively related to the Netherlands. As I have reported, my
ministry, therefore, maintains intensive contacts with the European
Commission and other member states. The developments around the
Schmallenberg virus are, therefore, to be specifically included in the
agenda of the meeting of the "Standing Committee on the Food Chain and
Animal Health" (SCOFCAH) on 11 Jan 2012 in Brussels.

I will keep the House informed of further developments.

Dr Henk Bleker
Secretary of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation

--
Communicated by:
Sabine Zentis
Castleview Pedigree English Longhorns
Gut Laach
52385 Nideggen, Germany
CVLonghorns@aol.com

[The 2 following reports, updated and signed on 30 Dec 2011, are
available on the website of the new Dutch Food and Consumer Product
Safety Authority (nVWA):

1. Schmallenberg virus table-form progress report, nVWA, 30 Dec 2011
http://www.vwa.nl/txmpub/files/?p_file_id=2201855.

2. A map, showing the locations throughout Netherlands of the 28
positive sheep farms, at
http://www.vwa.nl/txmpub/files/?p_file_id=2201854.

The Dutch Minister's report provides information on a positive bovine
case in Germany. It will be interesting to follow the situation (the
appearance or absence of congenital malformations) in the German and
Dutch dairy cattle herds, which presented (mild and ephemeral)
clinical disease attributed to SBV in August and September 2011.
Akabane virus was known to cause arthrogryposis (but no
hydranencephaly) in bovines during their 2nd semester of gestation.

Development of a serological test and its application in contact
persons will provide definitive information on the potential public
health aspects of SBV. - Mod.AS

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1r1l]
See Also
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (10): Belgium, update 20111228.3696
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (09): Update 20111225.3674
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (08): Update 20111225.3671
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (07): (Belgium) cong. mal., ovine 20111223.3665
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (06): (Germany) classification, update 20111223.3662
Schmallenberg virus - Netherlands (03): update 20111221.3653
Schmallenberg virus - Netherlands (02): risk profile 20111221.3645
Schmallenberg virus - Netherlands: cong. mal., ovine, bovine, RFI 20111217.3621
Undiagnosed illness, bovine - Germany, Netherlands (02): new virus
susp. 20111119.3404
Undiagnosed illness, bovine - Germany, Netherlands: RFI 20111115.3371
.................................................arn/msp/jw
</body>
