<header id=020528>
Published Date: 2011-07-10 05:23:45 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hendra virus, equine - Australia (08): (QL,NS)
Archive Number: 20110710.2084
</header>
<body id=020528>
HENDRA VIRUS, EQUINE - AUSTRALIA (08): (QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES),
HUMAN EXPOSURE
************************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: 7 Jul 2011
Source: NSW Department of Primary Industries [edited]
http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/aboutus/news/recent-news/agriculture-news-releases/second-case-of-hendra-virus


New South Wales (NSW) Department of Primary Industries are
controlling a 2nd outbreak of Hendra virus in NSW, which has killed
one horse on a property near Macksville on the Mid North Coast.

"The property has been placed in quarantine, and the dead horse has
been buried," NSW chief veterinary officer Ian Roth said. "There are 3
other horses on the quarantined property which are currently showing
no signs of illness."

NSW Health director of health protection Dr Jeremy McAnulty said that
6 people who have had close contact with the infected horse will be
closely monitored for any symptoms of the infection. "Public Health
Unit staff have interviewed these people to assess their level of
exposure," he said.

Mr Roth said the Macksville area property was the 2nd in NSW affected
by Hendra virus after a Wollongbar property was quarantined following
the death of one horse last Thursday.

--
communicated by:
Dr Irene Lai MD
Sydney Australia
<irene.lai@internationalsos.com>

******
[2]
Date: 8 Jul 2011
Source: The Australian [edited]
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/lethal-horse-virus-heads-south-to-threaten-stud-farms/story-fn59niix-1226090228105


The deadly Hendra virus is advancing down the eastern seaboard, with
NSW biosecurity scrambling yesterday [7 Jul 2011] to contain an
outbreak on the state's mid-north coast.

A horse that died on a property near Macksville, 50 km south of Coffs
Harbour, is the 2nd in NSW to have succumbed in a fortnight, with the
batborne disease detected further south than ever before. The state
has been free of Hendra for the past 5 years, and its sudden eruption
will sound alarm bells, particularly in the world-famous thoroughbred
horse breeding preserve of the Upper Hunter Valley, only 4 hours'
drive away.

The Macksville outbreak, confirmed yesterday [7 Jul 2011] when test
results came back for a 16 year old mare that died on Sunday [3 Jul
2011], comes on top of a Hendra emergency in southern Queensland that
has so far killed 5 horses, put 8 properties under quarantine, and
exposed 17 people to infection. The other NSW Hendra case involved the
death of a horse on 30 Jun 2011 at Wollongbar, east of Lismore, and
the exposure of 9 people. Another 6 people, including a vet, have been
exposed in the Macksville incident, though none is considered at
serious risk.

While Hendra outbreaks have been relatively regular in Queensland
since the disease was identified in 1994 -- averaging 1 to 2 a year --
the only other known NSW case was in 2006 near Murwillumbah, just over
the border.

NSW chief vet Ian Roth confirmed yesterday [7 Jul 2011] that the
Macksville outbreak was the most southerly on record and underlined
how health authorities did not "really understand the full picture" of
how the virus was spread by flying foxes.

Macksville racehorse trainer Robert Bradford, 47, whose property is
near the quarantined property, said the arrival of Hendra in the area
was devastating. "I can only lock up 7 horses, and then I'm still left
with 11 of them out in paddocks," he said. "I try to keep the horses
away from trees and the water, but it's all out in the open."

Queensland's chief veterinary officer, Rick Symons, told The
Australian that flying foxes ranged as far south as Victoria, and all
bats had to be regarded as potential carriers of the disease.

"What's happening this year [2011] is obviously worse than any in the
past in terms of spreading the virus," Dr Symons said.

Mr Roth said bio-investigators were satisfied the infected Macksville
horse had not been off the quarantined property and had contracted the
virus there. The property contains fig trees, which are known to
attract bats when flowering at this time of year. Three other horses
on the property remained outwardly well. The infected mare started to
show signs of illness last Friday, but not with the flu-like symptoms
generally associated with Hendra, Mr Roth said. The horse was "wobbly
on its legs and didn't know what it was doing," he said. Its condition
deteriorated rapidly on Saturday [2 Jul 2011] and a local vet, alert
to the risk, donned full protective gear before taking the samples
that yesterday [7 Jul 2011] confirmed the Hendra case.

Scientists believe horses are infected with the virus when they
ingest the droppings or secretions of bats. People, in turn, are put
at risk if they come into contact with the bodily fluids of sick
horses. Fortunately, the virus dies within hours outside its animal
host, and the level of exposure needs to be hefty for a person to
contract it.

Seven people are known to have caught the disease from sick horses,
and 4 of them died. The latest outbreak, however, appears to be more
lethal to horses than previous ones.

Tests of a flying fox colony near Boonah, southwest of Brisbane, have
shown that 30 per cent of the animals were carrying active Hendra
virus, compared with the standard 7 per cent.

The Mayor of Macksville-based Nambucca Shire Council, Rhonda Hoban,
said people were worried that bat numbers seem to have swelled, and
the bats were also nesting nearer to residential areas. "It darkens
the sky when they move all at once," she said.

[byline: Jamie Walker and Sallie Don]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: 9 Jul 2011
Source: The Australian [edited]
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/i-just-turned-24-it-felt-like-50-the-horror-of-hendra/story-fn59niix-1226091076221


Natalie Boehm is 24 and feels 50. She takes 17 tablets a day, can
manage only 2 4-hour shifts a week at work and is so tired some
mornings she can barely lift her head off the pillow.

The Brisbane veterinary nurse is one of 3 known survivors of Hendra
virus. Three years after contracting the illness and losing her friend
and workmate, vet Ben Cunneen, to it, she is grappling with a
debilitating legacy.

"People just can't understand how this changes you," she says
quietly. "I know I'm lucky to still be here. ... People tell me that
all the time. But, to be honest, if I knew how sick I was going to be,
I think I would have just rolled over and let it take me."

Ms Boehm is speaking from the home in Logan City, on Brisbane's
western outskirts, she shares with her parents. The horse country that
rolls out towards Beaudesert is on their doorstep and so too is the
Hendra virus. In nearby Park Ridge, a horse is dead, and 5 properties
have been quarantined, as biosecurity agencies scramble to contain the
biggest eruption of the bat-borne disease on record.

Four other horses have died in outbreaks southwest of Brisbane, and
17 people exposed to the virus are undergoing health checks.

In NSW, hit for the 1st time by dual Hendra emergencies near Lismore
and south of Coffs Harbour, another 2 horses are confirmed dead, and
15 people are being monitored.

Among those sweating on blood test results is veterinary surgeon
Kylie Schaaf, who tended the dying Park Ridge horse on acreage on
Brisbane's southern suburban fringe.

She worked with Cunneen and Ms Boehm before their encounter with
Hendra virus in June 2008. The world of large animal veterinary
medicine is a tight one, and this week it reached deep to comfort its
own.

Cunneen was the 1st of 2 Queensland vets to be killed by Hendra. Ms
Schaaf's travails take to 3 the number of vets around Brisbane who are
waiting anxiously for what everyone hopes will be the all-clear on
infection. Another of them, Peter Prenzler, a former One Nation state
MP, put down a sick horse on 20 Jun 2011 without knowing it had
Hendra. He was not wearing the personal protection equipment
recommended because he thought the dying animal had colic.

"It's a bit of a cloud hanging over me, but after I got those 1st
tests back and they were clear, I felt a lot more confident," he told
The Weekend Australian.

A 4th vet in NSW is in the same predicament, and Ms Boehm says her
heart goes out to them all. "I sometimes wish I could go in instead of
them because I've had the virus," she says. "I might get sick again,
but I can't catch it again. When I hear there's another sick horse, I
feel like saying: 'Don't go in there.' I've got to live with this, and
I can't stand the thought of anyone else getting sick."

The events of the past fortnight, with an unprecedented 5 Hendra
flare-ups straddling the Queensland-NSW border, a distance of about
300 km, compound the dread invoked by the disease. Never before has it
been found as far south as the property at Macksville, 50 km out of
Coffs Harbour, where a 16-year-old mare was belatedly discovered to
have died last Sunday. And never before have so many outbreaks
happened so quickly. "Typically, we see 1-2 outbreaks a year, and in
some cases none at all," says Queensland chief health officer
Jeannette Young.

Chief vet Rick Symons admits this Hendra season is worse in terms of
the number of outbreaks, the distribution and the number of people
affected. "We have theories, some of them reasonably developed, but
very few answers," Dr Symons says.

Much about the virus remains unknown, including exactly how it is
spread by flying foxes to horses, then people, and why it emerges in
the chill of the middle months, until now almost exclusively in
Queensland. The recorded history of the disease is lamentably short.
It was only identified in the spring of 1994 at the Hendra stables of
Brisbane horse trainer Vic Rail. He fell ill with a pneumonia-like
infection and became the 1st of its 4 known human victims.

Soon enough, the fruit bat was pinged as the culprit. The
paramyxovirus that it carries is part of the family of viruses that
cause measles in people and distemper in dogs. Horses are believed to
become infected when they ingest the droppings or bodily secretions of
bats feeding or nesting in trees above them. Just why horses are so
vulnerable is another of those imponderables. In Malaysia, a close
relation of Hendra, the Nipah virus, attacks pigs and can spill across
to humans; in Bangladesh, alarmingly, there is no animal bridge:
people have been infected directly with Nipah by flying foxes.

Dr Symons says another feature of the current outbreaks is that
infected horses are dying faster than before. In some cases, the
animal had become sick in the morning and was in such a state by the
same afternoon it had to be put down.

Mr Prenzler was horrified by the condition of the horse he
encountered on 20 Jun 2011 at Noel Fearon's Mt Alford property, 80 km
southwest of Brisbane. "When we got to the poor horse, it was rolling
around in agony," he says. He did not suspect Hendra at that time. On
1 Jul 2011, he was called back to the property to treat another ill
horse. This time, Mr Prenzler donned the PPE gear. The horse had nasal
discharge, and he thought this was due to spasmodic colic. It was too
far gone to help. "It's bloody awful to watch," the vet says. "We
euthanased the horse."

Fortunately, Mr Prenzler had the presence of mind to take blood
samples from both animals, which later tested positive for Hendra. The
pattern has been for horses to present with clinical signs not
necessarily indicative of the flu-like ones generally associated with
the disease.

In the latest confirmed case in Macksville, the animal was unsteady
on its legs and disorientated, according to NSW chief vet Ian Roth.
It, too, succumbed rapidly. Test results made public on Thursday [7
Jul 2011] confirmed the cause was Hendra, and 3 horses on the property
are now being monitored.

Dr Symons says authorities are trying to understand why the virus
seems to be more virulent this time around. It could be simply a
matter of volume: recent sampling of a colony of bats near Boonah,
southwest of Brisbane, found that almost 30 per cent of the animals
were carrying active Hendra, against the norm of about 7 per cent.

This goes to another puzzling aspect of the contagion: Hendra
typically breaks out in the cool months in Queensland, between May and
October. At 1st, scientists suspected a link to the flying fox's
breeding season. Now, however, there is growing belief that an array
of factors could be involved, including the availability of food for
the fruit bats. "It appears there must be a perfect storm of factors,
not just the presence of the virus, for spillover (from bats to
horses) to occur," says Hume Field, principal scientist with the
Queensland Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases.

Hendra is lethal when activated. It attacks the lining of small blood
vessels, known as arterioles, and nerve cells. The respiratory system
and the brain are most vulnerable. Once the virus takes hold, having
consolidated in the back of the nose or throat, it enters the blood
stream, and symptoms appear.

The lab animals -- ferrets -- being used by veterinary researcher
Deborah Middleton to develop a vaccine and treatment for Hendra
generally become ill within 3 days of exposure.

She says her work at CSIRO's Geelong-based Australian Animal Health
Laboratory is "piggybacking" off research by US scientists, who have
been concentrating on Nipah.

This has a somewhat curious antecedent. The Americans have classed
Nipah and, by extension Hendra, as a possible biological warfare
agent, and their effort to develop a vaccine and antidote has been
driven by concern that terrorists could make a weapon of it.

Dr Middleton is particularly interested in what she calls the
"stealth period" with Hendra: the time between when the virus starts
to replicate and when the victim starts showing symptoms. She found
that ferrets that received an antibody treatment derived from the US
work on Nipah invariably survived, provided it was administered before
they showed signs of illness.

This is the hope of containing Hendra, along with a horse vaccine
also being developed by Dr Middleton's team.

Three people have received the experimental antiserum. It was too
late for the last of the 4 known victims, Rockhampton vet Alister
Rodgers, who died in September 2009. Rebecca Day and her daughter,
Mollie, 12, of the Sunshine Coast, received the drug last June and
emerged with a clean bill of health.

Back in 2008, there was no such help for Ms Boehm. The best Dr
Playford and his team could do for her and Mr Cunneen was to treat
them with the antiviral Ribavirin, since found to be ineffective
against Hendra. Each of them developed acute encephalitis or
inflammation of the brain. Dr Cunneen, 33, with a pregnant wife at
home, did not come of out an induced coma. Ms Boehm, for her part, is
still fighting her way back from the ordeal. "I have a lot of
neurological sort of things that happen," she says, wearily. "My whole
body aches, I have pain, hearing loss in my right ear and this
unbelievable fatigue. A couple of weeks ago I turned 24. I felt like I
was 50."

[byline: Jamie Walker, Andrew Fraser, Sarah Elks]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Fruit bats are by nature very sloppy eaters. They drool profusely
when eating, and they love figs. Two of these properties had fig
trees. The trees may be the only shade for the horses, and there also
may be water under them. Perhaps the fig trees need to be fenced off.

An interesting thing about this virus is that the horse seems to be
the intermediate in transmitting the virus to humans. How does the
horse change the virus so that it is made infective to humans? Much
work clearly remains to be done on this virus. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (07): (QL,NS) 20110706.2045
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (06): (QL,NS) human exposure 20110705.2036
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (05): (NSW) human exposure 20110702.2012
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (04): (QL) 20110701.1997
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (03): (QL) human exposure 20110630.1989
Hendra virus, equine - Australia (02): (QL) 20110629.1984
Hendra virus, equine - Australia: vaccine 20110525.1589
.................................................sb/tg/msp/sh
</body>
