<header id=055637>
Published Date: 2012-01-01 10:55:04 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Cronobacter sakazakii, infant formula, fatal - USA: corr
Archive Number: 20120101.0003
</header>
<body id=055637>
CRONOBACTER SAKAZAKII, INFANT FORMULA, FATAL - USA: CORRECTION
****************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 31 Dec 2011
Source: TimeU.S. [edited]
http://www.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,2103433,00.html


4 cases of infants sickened by a rare bacterium sometimes linked to
powdered formula, including two 2 died, are not related and parents
can continue using the products to feed their babies, 2 federal
agencies announced Friday [Dec 30, 2011].

Scientists with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the
Food and Drug Administration tested various types of powdered infant
formula and distilled water, known as nursing water, and found no
cases of contamination by _Cronobacter sakazakii_.

3 babies, including one in Missouri and another in Florida who died,
were sickened by the bacteria that are found naturally in the
environment and in plants such as wheat and rice. _Cronobacter_ also
has been traced to dried milk and powdered formula.

2 other babies, in Illinois and Oklahoma, were sickened by the
bacteria but survived. The Missouri baby of Lebanon, Mo., died earlier
this month after appearing lethargic and displaying what his family
said were signs of a stomach ache. Tests at a Springfield [Missouri]
hospital showed he had _Cronobacter_, and he died a few days later
after being removed from life support. The infection can be treated
with antibiotics, but it's deemed extremely dangerous to babies less
than 1 month old and those born premature.

[Missouri baby's] death prompted the CDC to ask public health
officials from around the country to look for other cases of
_Cronobacter_ infection among infants. That request generated reports
from 3 other states about their cases. [The Missouri baby's] case also
prompted Wal-Mart and several other national retailers to pull Enfamil
Newborn formula -- which [the Missouri baby] had consumed before
getting sick -- from 3,000 stores until the batches could be tested
for contamination. Those tests came back negative, CDC announced
Friday.

"The FDA tested factory sealed containers of powdered infant formula
and nursery water with the same lot numbers as the opened containers
collected from Missouri and no _Cronobacter_ bacteria were found," the
FDA said. Powdered infant formula is not sterile, and experts have
said there are not adequate methods to completely remove or kill all
bacteria that might creep into formula before or during production.

The FDA said it gets 4-6 reports a year of infant infections related
to formula and has not found a powder that tested positive since 2002.
The CDC said with recent increased awareness of the illness, it has
received 12 cases in 2011. "CDC laboratory tests of samples provided
by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services found
_Cronobacter_ bacteria in an opened container of infant formula, an
opened bottle of nursery water and prepared infant formula," the
agency said Friday. "It is unclear how the contamination occurred."

CDC also tested bacteria in the Illinois case and found it differed
genetically from that found in the Missouri case. It said bacteria
from the Oklahoma and Florida cases were not available for testing.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
promed@promedmail.org

[For a discussion of _Cronobacter_ infection and powdered infant
formula, see the prior ProMED-mail post Cronobacter sakazakii, infant
formula, fatal - USA: (MO, IL) recall 20111224.3670.

The news report above states that the correct number of recent cases
of _Cronobacter_ infections in infants is 4: one each from the states
of Missouri, Illinois, Oklahoma, and Florida. The Florida and Missouri
cases were fatal. Genotyping of the strains isolated from the Missouri
and Illinois cases found them to be different, and no _Cronobacter_
were isolated from sealed containers of powdered infant formula and
nursery water with the same lot numbers as the opened containers
collected from Missouri. However, CDC laboratory testing found
_Cronobacter_ in an opened container of infant formula, an opened
bottle of nursery water and prepared infant formula formula,
presumably obtained from the family of the dead Missouri infant; how
the contamination occurred is not known.

The CDC and FDA have cleared powdered infant formula in the 4 cases of
_Cronobacter_ infection in infants; but, because powdered infant
formulas are known not to be necessarily sterile and may contain
pathogenic bacteria, recommendations have been made concerning
preparation and handling of these products (see Agostoni C, Axelsson,
I, Goulet O, et al. Preparation and Handling of Powdered Infant
Formula: A Commentary by the ESPGHAN Committee on Nutrition. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 2004;39:320-22). Mod.ML]
See Also
2011
----
Cronobacter sakazakii, infant formula, fatal - USA: (MO, IL) recall 20111224.3670
2005
----
Enterobacter sakazakii, infant formula - Ireland (02): background 20050127.0299
Enterobacter sakazakii, infant formula - Ireland: recall 20050126.0277
1997
----
Meningitis, E. sakazakii - Scotland (Kilmarnock) 19970314.0567
.................................................sb/ml/jw
</body>
