<header id=007415>
Published Date: 2011-11-27 16:13:40 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis A - Czech Republic: (OV)
Archive Number: 20111127.3463
</header>
<body id=007415>
HEPATITIS A - CZECH REPUBLIC: (OSTRAVA)
***************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 25 Nov 22011
Source: ROMEA [edited]
http://www.romea.cz/english/index.php?id=detail&detail=2007_2976


An epidemic of hepatitis [A] virus infection has been spreading since
the summer [2011] among the residents of Predndrazi street in the
Privoz quarter of Ostrava, the 3rd-largest city in the Czech Republic.
While the infection has most probably been prevented from spreading
further, the local authorities investigating the source of the disease
discovered the neighborhood sewer was not operating properly. News
server IDNES.cz reports that repair of the sewer has been delayed by
disputes between city hall and the private company that owns the land
under which the blocked portion of the pipes is located.

The Moravian-Silesian region is in the unflattering position of having
the country's highest hepatitis rates. Public health inspectors say
the greatest problem this year [2011] occurred in Ostrava-Privoz. The
epidemic broke out there in July and ended in October [2011]. A total
of 35 people, most of them Romani children, fell ill.

The incubation period for the disease lasts 50 days and has not yet
ended. "We announced extraordinary vaccinations, and between 17 Oct
and 4 Nov 2011, we inoculated most of the 300 pupils and staff of the
Christian Elementary School and the Premysl Pitter nursery school
against hepatitis A. Those who couldn't be vaccinated during that
period should gradually be inoculated in future as well," said Irena
Martinkova, head of the Disease Control Department of the Regional
Hygiene Station in Ostrava.

Sona Tarhovisk, director of a school in which quarantine measures were
finally lifted this week, is grateful for the free vaccinations.
"Pregnant women come here; mothers of young children, mothers with
pregnant daughters, and some of our teachers are pregnant as well.
They were all afraid of infection, because hepatitis has been ailing
this community for 3 years now. The year before last [2009], we had to
cancel our school camping trip because of it," she said.

Tarhovisk says the spread of both head lice and hepatitis are linked
to the unsuitable conditions in which Romani families are currently
living. "In the privately-owned apartment buildings, they are paying
high rents, maybe as much as CZK 11 000 [USD 564] for 2 rooms, even
though they have to heat them with coal-burning stoves and have
problems with electricity and sewerage. The landlords just collect the
money and invest nothing in improvements," the school director says,
adding that 36 of her pupils have already emigrated abroad. The most
recent family to leave took their 3 children this week to live with
relatives who have found decent housing conditions and work in another
country.

The local council of the Moravsk Ostrava municipality, which manages
one of the buildings in Prednadrazi street, is having a hard time
addressing the situation. It seems clear the municipality will have to
move the residents elsewhere. "The sewers in Prednadrazi street are
not working. When people try to flush the toilets, they back up. One
of those buildings belongs to us, while another 8 belong to a private
firm.

Unfortunately, for a long time, it was not clear to whom the sewer
belongs, and it is still not clear who will repair it. That is why we
will have to move out all 9 of the families living in the unsuitable
property that we own. We are looking for available apartments for them
now," said Petra Bernfeldova, the Vice-Mayor of Moravsk Ostrava and
Privoz municipality.

The town hall wanted to inspect the state of the sewer, which was not
registered as belonging to anyone, but the Ostravsk opravna a
strojirna firm (Ostrava Repair and Engineering), which owns the land
where the afflicted part of the piping is located, reportedly refused
to let professional inspectors onto the property. The firm then
claimed ownership of the sewer but refused to pay to repair it. "The
firm's approach to this problem is irresponsible," the Vice-Mayor
says. Ladislav Martinek, the firm's executive head, defends the
company against that charge. "We are sorry that hepatitis is spreading
in our precincts, but we never even suspected that sewer lines were
running beneath the yard of a property we privatized several years
ago. No one has concluded a contract with us regarding those sewer
lines, and unlike Ostrava Waterworks and Sewerage (Ostravske vodrny a
kanalizace), we have not been paid one crown to service them. Why
should we have to cover the cost of the repair now?" Martinek asks.

The executive makes no secret of the fact that the firm has different
plans for the land. "We don't want to dig up the tracks there. Instead
of repairing several hundreds of meters of backed-up sewer line, the
town could build a new, much shorter connection to Palacky street near
here. We have no problem with letting them onto our land," he said.
The district council is not considering that option. The situation
must be addressed rapidly. The town hall has already initiated
administrative proceedings against both the district and the firm to
whom the sewer belongs. "The environmental protection department will
demand the owner bring the sewer into proper working order. They have
to decide by 20 Jan [2012]. The department will do its best to
accelerate the proceedings, but it depends on how many objections the
firm raises," town spokesperson Andrea Vojkovsk said.

[Byline: Gwendolyn Albertd]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Members of the Romani community in the city of Ostrava are the
victims in this unfortunate incident. Ostrava is the 3rd largest city
in the Czech Republic. It is the administrative centre of the
Moravian-Silesian Region. Its history and growth have been largely
affected by exploitation of the high quality coal deposits discovered
in the locality. Many of the heavy industry companies are being closed
down or transformed, yet the city remains one of the most polluted in
the European Union. Ostrava can be located in the HealthMap
interactive map of the Czech Republic at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1ttS.

Hepatitis A is a liver infection caused by hepatitis A virus (HAV).
The virus is spread when an uninfected (or unvaccinated) person eats
or drinks something contaminated by the faeces of an HAV-infected
person. The disease is closely associated with inadequate sanitation
and poor personal hygiene. Unlike hepatitis B and C, hepatitis A
infection does not cause chronic liver disease and is rarely fatal,
but it can cause debilitating symptoms. Anyone who has not had been
infected previously or been vaccinated can contract hepatitis A.
People who live in places with poor sanitation are at higher risk. In
areas where the virus is widespread, most HAV infections occur during
early childhood.

There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A. Improved sanitation
and immunization are the most effective ways to combat the disease. As
in the present situation, vaccination activities should be
supplemented by health education, improved sanitation and attention to
personal hygiene. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2008
----
Hepatitis A - Czech Republic (03): (Prague, Central Bohemia) 20081002.3113
Hepatitis A - Czech Republic (02):(Prague) 20081001.3102
2007
----
Hepatitis A - Czech Republic 20080923.3007
.................................................sb/cp/msp/lm
</body>
