<header id=057677>
Published Date: 2009-06-16 05:23:05 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Irradiated cat food toxicity - Australia
Archive Number: 20090616.2222
</header>
<body id=057677>
IRRADIATED CAT FOOD TOXICITY - AUSTRALIA
****************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[1]
Date: Sat 30 May 2009
Source: The Sydney Morning Herald [edited]
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/catfood-irradiation-banned-as-pet-theory-proved-20090529-bq8h.html>


Cat-food irradiation banned as pet theory proved
------------------------------------------------
A series of mysterious cat deaths was caused by the
government-mandated practice of irradiating imported pet food.

The Agriculture Minister, Tony Burke, has ordered the controversial
sterilization process, which has been in place for more than a
decade, to cease immediately, following compelling overseas evidence
that some cats can suffer fatal neurological damage after eating
irradiated dry food. Dogs do not appear to be affected by similarly
treated food.

About 90 cats fell ill last year [2008] and 30 died before a Sydney
vet, Georgina Child, made the link in November between the mystery
illness and a brand of Canadian gourmet pet food called Orijen.

The manufacturer, Champion Petfoods, blamed the contaminated food on
Australian quarantine regulations, which demand that pet food not
cooked over a specified temperature undergo irradiation of 50
kiloGrays upon arrival in the country. Of the 60 countries Champion
Petfoods exports to, only Australia makes irradiation compulsory.

The Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service and the company that
carries out the process, Steritech, insisted at the time the
irradiation process was harmless. A limited range of imported human
foods, including dried herbs and some tropical fruits, are also
irradiated before landing on store shelves, but at much lower levels
than that mandated for pet food.

Mr Burke said the inspection service decided to act in response to
international reports his department received only late last week
[week of 18 May 2009]. Work was being done in state and federal
governments to see how safety standards for pet food could be
improved. "People expect that any treatments conducted on imported
pet food will result in food that is still safe for pets," he said.

Dr Child said the move was welcome but did not go far enough. The
irradiation ban is not being extended to imported dog food, leaving
cats with access to such food still at risk. "We still don't know why
this problem is unique to cats, and we're still not certain why some
brands of pet food are affected by irradiation and not others," she
said. "What this does show is that all food that has been irradiated
needs to be labelled, which isn't the case at the moment."

[A Dundas woman] who lost 2 cats after they were fed the Orijen pet
food, said the ban was great news. Champion Petfoods has set up a
fund to disperse compensation for veterinary bills for all affected
Australian cat owners.

[Byline: Kelly Burke]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

******
[2]
Date: Mon 8 Jun 2009
Source: The VIN (Veterinary Information Network) News Service [edited]
<http://news.vin.com/VINNews.aspx?articleId=13088>


An outbreak in Australia of neurological disorders in cats fed
irradiated diets is a first among pets but not unprecedented.

At least 3 instances of irradiated food causing severe nervous system
disease have occurred around the world since 1998. The cases happened
in Ireland and the United States in laboratory cats and in Australia
among pet cats.

The Australian government in late May [2009] ordered an immediate
stop to sterilizing cat food via irradiation after reviewing
scientific studies pointing to food irradiation as the culprit behind
illnesses characterized by ataxia or paralysis of the limbs,
especially the hind limbs. How irradiation may be causing food to
become toxic to cats is unknown. The problem affected 90 cats in
Australia, of which 30 died, mostly by euthanasia after they became
paraplegic or tetraplegic, according to Dr Georgina Child, a
neurologist at the Small Animal Specialist Hospital and University of
Sydney Teaching Hospital.

Child told The VIN News Service by e-mail that all the cats had eaten
an imported dry diet, sold under the brand name Orijen and made in
Canada by Champion Petfoods. The food was subject to gamma
irradiation upon entry to Australia at levels greater than or equal
to 50 kilo-Grays (kGy).

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also allows animal feed,
including pet food and treats, to be irradiated up to 50 kGy. By
comparison, most human foods in the United States allowed to be
irradiated are limited to levels of 30 kGys and below. Packaged meats
for astronauts are an exception; those may be treated up to 44 kGy.
The FDA requires all irradiated foods to be labeled as such;
Australia does not require labels on irradiated pet food.

Signs in the Australian cats first appeared 3 to 6 months after they
were exposed to the dry food, Child said. Some had eaten the food for
as few as 3 weeks; others for more than 6 months. Most of the cats
were fed other foods, as well. The affected cats ranged in age from
less than one year to 15 years. Early signs of illness included a
wobbly gait, unwillingness to jump onto sofas or beds, and loss of
balance exhibited, for example, by falling off tables, according to a
Q&A for consumers prepared by Champion Petfoods.

Child said about half of the affected cats remain paraparetic or
tetraparetic; some remain paraplegic or tetraplegic. "Many cats have
been at their worst for 2 or more months before showing any
improvement," she said, noting that fewer than one-fifth have
recovered fully. Child said histopathology showed "diffuse,
symmetric, severe white matter degeneration of predominantly the
spinal cord but also (the) brain stem and cerebrum, with
demyelination the predominant feature."

"No specific treatment has resulted in an improvement in the outcome
of affected cats," she said. "A change in diet, nursing care,
physiotherapy, and time seem to be the only factors common in
recovered cats."

But even patients who are paralyzed and lose vision as a result of
eating irradiated food can fully recover, given sufficient time,
nursing care, and food that hasn't been irradiated, said Dr. Ian
Duncan, professor of neurology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Veterinary Medicine. That's what Duncan saw with cats
housed in a private laboratory in Wisconsin that were fed irradiated
diets. The irradiation was meant to help keep the cats -- known as
"specific pathogen-free" or SPF cats -- from unwittingly acquiring
infections. In that episode, which was reported this spring [2009] in
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences [Duncan ID et al:
Extensive remyelination of the CNS leads to functional recovery. PNAS
April 21, 2009 106(16): 6832-6) abstract available at
<http://www.pnas.org/content/106/16/6832.abstract>], the food was
irradiated at levels of 25 to 50 kGy.

The signs took about 4 months to appear, and they abated after
another 2 to 4 months once the cats were given a non-irradiated diet.
Altogether, about 30 cats were affected, and most made impressive
recoveries, Duncan said.

Oddly, only cats that became pregnant while on the irradiated diet
developed neurological symptoms, he noted. Male cats and offspring
exposed to the same diet did not become ill. Male cats have been
affected elsewhere, however.

In the Irish case, 190 domestic short-hair cats housed together
developed hind limb ataxia and proprioceptive defects during a period
of 4 years, from 1998 to 2001 [JP Cassidy et al:
Leukoencephalomyelopathy in Specific Pathogen-free Cats. Vet Pathol
2007; 44: 912-6; available at
<http://www.vetpathology.org/cgi/content/full/44/6/912>]. As with the
Wisconsin colony, those animals were SPF cats.

Serendipitously, researchers had a control group in the form of
kittens that had been transferred from the SPF colony to a
conventional disease status colony on the same site. Both groups of
cats were fed on the same commercial formula ration, except that the
food bound for SFP cats was irradiated to levels between 36.3 and
47.3 kGy.

The transferred cats did not develop any neurological abnormalities.
More than one-third of the cats fed irradiated food did. "Following
supplementation of the irradiated diet with pasteurized proprietary
tinned cat food in the winter of 2001, and ultimately, the
replacement of the irradiated diet with an equivalent pasteurized
diet, no further cases occurred, "the researchers reported. Child
said the same researchers since have induced neurological problems in
cats at radiation levels as low as 26 kGy. A study with those results
is due to be published shortly, she said.

Exactly how irradiation renders food toxic to cats is unclear. It was
initially thought to be a vitamin A deficiency; the researchers in
Ireland, analyzing the nutritional content of cat food subject to
irradiation levels ranging from 28.9 kGy to 48.7 kGy, found that
vitamin A content diminished to levels below that recommended for
growth and reproduction.

By comparison, pasteurization reduced the vitamin A content in the
cat food, as well, but not below recommended levels. Curiously, the
researchers found that irradiation did not alter vitamin A in dog
food. However, radiation treatment did increase peroxide content in
dog food, cat food, and rodent food, up to 25-fold at the highest
dose.

"Gamma irradiation can have profound, selective effects on the
vitamin A and peroxide contents of dry diets, and caution is advised
when feeding such diets long-term and exclusively to SPF animals,
particularly cats," the researchers concluded [Caulfield CD et al:
Effects of Gamma Irradiation and Pasteurization on the Nutritive
Composition of Commercially Available Animal Diets. J Am Assoc Lab
Anim Sci. 2008 Nov; 47(6): 61-6, available at
<http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2687132>].
But subsequent studies found that affected animals were not deficient
in vitamin A after all, Child said. "Possible causes still include a
micronutrient deficiency -- although this seems less likely -- or
toxicity induced by irradiation-induced changes in the dry food (more
likely),"she said.

Champion Petfoods, maker of the Orijen brand, noted in a Q&A dated
November 2008 that its own testing of irradiated cat food found the
treatment depleted vitamin A and formed free radicals in the food.
Their statement reads in part: "Irradiation does not affect all foods
equally. Orijen is a nutritionally dense food with much higher levels
of long-chain fatty acids (DHA, EPA) than conventional pet foods.
These fatty acids are susceptible to oxidation following irradiation.
Byproducts from fatty acid oxidation, mainly free radicals, are
released into the body with the potential to cause tissue damage.
"Combined with the loss of antioxidant vitamins [such as vitamin A],
free radicals are thought to be a major contributing factor."

Although the irradiation ban applies only to cat food, Champion
Petfoods has pulled its dog food from the Australian market as well,
Sales and Marketing Manager Peter Muhlenfeld told the VIN News
Service. "Cats frequently eat from dog dishes and vice versa," he
said in an e-mail. "We do not believe the market to be safe unless
both cat and dog foods are allowed entry without irradiation."

According to the company Q&A:
- Only Australia requires irradiation of Orijen cat foods, out of 50
countries in which the food is sold.
- Orijen was sold in Australia only for a 9-month period -- February
through October 2008.
- In that period, only 6 pallets of Orijen cat food actually entered
retail distribution, enough to feed 200 cats each day during the 9
months.
- During the same period, shipments of Orijen cat food were made to
49 other countries, enough to feed 85 000 cats. In no other country
has neurological illness been reported.

Why Australia requires irradiation of imported pet foods is unclear.
Officials at the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS)
did not respond to an e-mailed request for information.

Patty Lovera, assistant director of Food and Water Watch, a
non-profit consumer organization based in Washington, DC [USA], that
monitors food irradiation around the world, said Australia's high
vigilance on biosecurity may stem from its being an island nation.
"My impression is that they're very tuned to things coming in that
might be some kind of threat to their agriculture," Lovera said.

A notice to industry posted by the AQIS before the government banned
cat-food irradiation suggests that is the case. It states: "Heat or
irradiation treatments are necessary to address animal quarantine
pest and disease risks that may be associated with imported pet
foods." A separate notice states that, as an alternative to
radiation, importers may subject pet food to a moist heat treatment
-- through which the product must achieve a certain core temperature
for a certain duration.

According to the Champion Petfoods Q&A, "The overwhelming majority of
cat foods in Australia do not require irradiation." Orijen was
required to undergo irradiation because the food includes fresh meats
that were cooked at low temperatures. The company takes pride in the
distinctions between its products and those of conventional pet-food
makers. Its gourmet foods are marketed as "biologically appropriate,"
and made with "fresh, regional ingredients."

"We're different. We sell only what we make ourselves, "it says on
its website in an allusion to the use of co-packing facilities by
some of its competitors. Co-packers are contracted to produce pet
foods for a variety of companies sold under a variety of brand names.

The widespread use of co-packing contributed in 2007 to the largest
recall of pet food in North American history, due to contamination by
the industrial chemical melamine, which affected 180 brands of pet
food. Muhlenfeld said Champion Petfoods has a program to offset
medical bills of owners of affected pets up to [AUD] 1000 [USD
796.5]. It also donated [AUD] 10 000 [USD 7965] to organizations in
Sydney that work with cat diseases.

The Australian ban on irradiation marks the 1st time in the world
that authorities rescinded an approved use of irradiation because it
is suspected to cause illness.

George Pauli, a retired chemist who worked for 29 years in the US
FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, said the FDA in
one instance reversed an approval on irradiation, but not because
anyone became ill. In that case from the 1960s, the US Department of
Defense asked to sterilize bacon through irradiation to create a
shelf-stable product that didn't need to be refrigerated. "The FDA,
when they reviewed it, thought everything looked good, but later on
... they concluded that the data were not nearly as solid and
convincing as first thought," Pauli said.

The Defense Department never came back with more data and a request
to reconsider, Pauli said. He speculated that the cat cases in
Australia are an example of species sensitivity. "More testing has
been done on rodents and dogs," he said. "Normally, testing (for
human safety) is not done on cats that much."

[Byline: Edie Lau]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka

[In response to these articles and some international legal
maneuvering between regulations and companies, ProMED-mail sought
clarification from Australian animal health authorities. Dr Mike
Nunn, Principal Scientist (Animal Biosecurity) with Biosecurity
Australia provided the following information:

Under Australia's "Quarantine Act 1908", the Australian Quarantine
and Inspection Service (AQIS) has responsibility to prevent the
introduction, establishment, or spread of pests and diseases. The
"Quarantine Proclamation 1998" refers to the level of quarantine risk
and the imposition of appropriate conditions that the Director of
Quarantine must consider before granting an import permit. A pet food
ingredient (or the final product) is considered acceptable if it is
heat-treated sufficiently to address Australia's quarantine concerns.
For example, ingredients of mammalian and avian origin generally
require heat treatment to achieve a core temperature of at least 100
deg C [212 deg F] for a minimum of 30 minutes. For products that do
not meet heat treatment requirements or where a manufacturer is
unable to provide AQIS with sufficient information to complete the
assessment, importers may be given the option to irradiate the pet
food on arrival to address outstanding quarantine concerns.

Gamma-irradiation is a valid and very effective treatment -- in
accordance with the scope of the "Quarantine Act 1908" and the
"Quarantine Proclamation 1998" -- to address the risk of introducing,
establishing or spreading disease within Australia. However, there is
now a body of evidence that gamma-irradiation of imported pet food
may actually be a causative factor for the disease chronic
leukoencephalomyelopathy in cats. As such, and unless future research
confirms otherwise, Biosecurity Australia no longer supports
gamma-irradiation of pet food for cats as a valid quarantine
treatment. However, Biosecurity Australia continues to support
gamma-irradiation as a valid and effective quarantine treatment
option for other products.

The background is that there have been a number of media reports (and
statements by a veterinary clinician and neurologist in Sydney, Dr
Georgina Child) that suggested some cats fed a particular brand of
imported pet food manufactured by Champion Pet Foods, Canada) had
developed a chronic and sometimes fatal neurological syndrome. The
particular product concerned was a semi-moist, fish and poultry based
product with no cereal ingredient. It was released onto the
Australian market in April/May 2008 and the 1st cases of disease in
cats were seen in September 2008 and cases continued until February
2009. It is estimated that approximately 1300 kg [approx. 2900 lb] of
irradiated product was imported, and a large proportion of this was
removed from sale after the manufacturer announced on 20 Nov 2008 a
voluntary recall of the product in Australia.

Representatives of AQIS, Biosecurity Australia, Food Standards
Australia New Zealand (FSANZ), and the Australian Veterinary
Association (AVA) met with Dr Child) who provided a detailed report
of her findings. Dr Child reported that the syndrome had affected at
least 87 cats in Australia with 27 deaths (23 that were euthanised
due to severe neurological signs; 4 died naturally, including 2 that
developed seizures). Affected cats developed ataxia, paraparesis and,
in the worst-affected cases, paraplegia and tetraplegia. Fewer than
20 percent fully recovered and about 50 percent improved but remain
paraplegic or tetraplegic. Many cats have been at their worst for 2
or more months before showing any improvement. Affected cats have
ranged in age from less than one year to 15 years. Signs were
typically seen 3 to 6 months after 1st exposure to the dry food and
the period the food was fed varied considerably (from about 3 weeks
to more than 6 months). Post mortem examination of 8 cats has shown
lesions very similar to those of cats fed irradiated pet food in
Ireland (Cassidy et al, 2007; Caulfield et al. in press) and in the
United States (Duncan et al, 2009) Dr Child's findings have since
been submitted for publication in the Australian Veterinary Journal.

A range of different breeds and, in some cases, several cats in the
same household were affected. The majority of affected cats had eaten
other products as well as the particular brand of imported cat food
and there was anecdotal evidence that in a perhaps 3 cases affected
cats ate dog food (and apparently not cat food) manufactured by the
same company and irradiated on import [in Australia]. Based on
reports from veterinary clinics selling the product, about 40 percent
of cats fed the particular brand of imported cat food 'developed
clinical signs of disease.' A detailed toxicological screening of the
pet food performed by the National Measurement Institute was unable
to identify a causative agent.

Dr Child also advised of an unconfirmed report of possible
leukoencephalomyelopathy in a few cats in Queensland in 2007 with a
possible link to another irradiated cat food product that was
subsequently removed from the market in late 2007. Biosecurity
Australia reviewed this information and the results of recent
publications related to cats and irradiated cat food. In particular,
a report by Cassidy et al (2007) of cats exhibiting hind-limb ataxia
associated with leukoencephalomyelopathy from an SPF (specific
pathogen free) colony fed long term exclusively on gamma-irradiated
food provided evidence of a possible link to the particular
gamma-irradiated diet used. Both SPF and conventional status cats
were fed to appetite on the same commercial formula ration
(Gilbertson and Page Ltd., Welwyn Garden City, UK), except that the
ration fed to SPF cats had been gamma-irradiated at between 36.3 kGy
and 47.3 kGy. No further cases occurred following the replacement of
the irradiated diet with an equivalent pasteurised diet.

An experimental study (Caulfield et al, in press) by the same group
into the effect of long-term feeding of irradiated dry cat food was
able to reproduce similar neurological lesions. Following feeding of
a diet irradiated at either 25.7-38.1 kGy or 38.1-53.6 kGy,
increasing numbers of cats presented with progressively severe ataxia
from day 140. Analysis of the diet revealed a reduction in vitamin A
levels of 43-48 percent, although the reduced level was still within
the maintenance levels for adult cats recommended by the Association
of American Feed Control officials and the United States National
Academy of Sciences' National Research Council. Levels of fat were
unchanged, although peroxide levels were substantially elevated --
leading the authors to conclude that free radical formation (due to
the irradiation) might play an important role in the pathogenesis of
the disease. This study provides some further evidence that some
gamma-irradiated diets might cause a neurological syndrome in cats.

In addition, researchers investigating multiple sclerosis (Duncan et
al, 2009) recently reported that cats fed an irradiated diet during
gestation developed a severe neurological disease, resulting in
severe myelin degeneration. Cats returned to a normal diet recovered
slowly within 3 to 4 months. Biochemical analysis of the food and
tissues from affected cats showed no dietary deficiencies or toxic
accumulations.

Biosecurity Australia also reviewed further detailed information
provided by Dr Child (such as, copies of the pathology reports on 8
affected cats and a draft short communication submitted to the
Australian Veterinary Journal). Biosecurity Australia has also
received an unconfirmed report that about 15 years ago, cats fed
irradiated dry product in an SPF breeding colony in the United States
developed a similar neurological condition on 3 separate occasions
(and was advised that the 2 pet food companies involved apparently
decided not to report the event in the literature).

Biosecurity Australia advised AQIS that consumption of some
irradiated pet food has recently been associated with severe, chronic
leukoencephalomyelopathy in cats in Australia and in specific
pathogen free (SPF) cat colonies and cat research feeding trials
overseas; that the association with consumption of irradiated pet
food appears to be restricted to cats; that the causative agent or
induced nutritional deficiency associated with the pet food is
unknown and unlikely to be determined (but does seem to be linked to
the irradiation of either the pet food or its packaging); that there
is a reasonable body of evidence that irradiation as a quarantine
treatment of pet food was recently associated with the disease
syndrome in cats in Australia; and that thus the continued use of
gamma-irradiation for pet food for cats can no longer be supported as
a quarantine treatment (although Biosecurity Australia continues to
support gamma-irradiation as a valid and effective quarantine
treatment option for other products).

As a result of this advice, AQIS will no longer offer
gamma-irradiation as a quarantine treatment option for imports of
dried/semi-moist cat food. Details of associated actions are provided
in advice posted on the AQIS website on Wed 3 May 2009
(<http://www.daff.gov.au/aqis/import/general-info/ian/09/33-2009>).

References
----------
1. Cassidy JP, Caulfield, Jones BR, Worrall S, Conlon L, Palmer AC,
Kelly J. (2007): Leukoencephalomyelopathy in specific pathogen-free
cats. Veterinary Pathology; 44: 912-6 [available at
<http://www.vetpathology.org/cgi/content/full/44/6/912>].
2. Caulfield CD, Cassidy JP, Kelly JP. (2008): Effects of Gamma
Irradiation and Pasteurization on the Nutritive Composition of
Commercially Available Animal Diets. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci. 2008
Nov; 47(6): 61-6 [available at
<http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2687132>].
3. Caulfield CD, Kelly JP, Jones BR, Worrall SL, Conlon L, Palmer AC
(in press): The experimental induction of leukoencephalomyelopathy in
cats. Veterinary Pathology, accepted for publication April 2009.
4. Duncan ID, Brower A, Kondo Y, Curlee JF, Schultz RD (2009):
Extensive remyelination of the CNS leads to functional recovery. PNAS
April 21, 2009 106(16): 6832-6 [abstract available at
<http://www.pnas.org/content/106/16/6832.abstract>].

End of the agency report.

The ProMED-mail moderator has resumed comments. It is extremely
important to note that Champion did a voluntary recall of all of the
food.

However, regarding a scientific argument, in some cases the pet foods
have been known to contain starch products, such as potato. When
heated to high temperatures, such as when French frying potatoes, a
product call acrylamide, may be produced. Acrylamide may be toxic to
some species or sensitive individuals. The acrylamide issue was
raised regarding fast foods and French fries several years ago. The
recommendation from most food safety agencies was to eat such foods
in moderation.

The irradiated or heat treated pet foods are known to contain starchy
products that may well be producing acrylamide under either of import
regiments. However acrylamide production by starchy foods has not
been investigated when considering irradiation. Cats may be a
particularly sensitive species to extremely low levels of some
product such as acrylamide.

Acrylamide caused cancer in animals in studies where animals were
exposed to acrylamide at very high doses. Acrylamide causes nerve
damage in people exposed to very high levels at work. Most regulatory
agencies are still assessing the impact of low level ingestion of
acrylamide. However, it is unlikely their assessments will be
concerned with cats. But indeed, if the cat is ultra sensitive,
perhaps they should examine the consequences in this sensitive
species.

In humans that have ingested large doses of acrylamide there are
reports of numbness, paresthesia, and weakened legs and hands. This
may be consistent with clinical signs displayed in cats. - Mod.TG]
See Also
2008
----
Pet food alert - USA: (multistate) chicken jerky 20081231.4132
2007
----
Pet food alert - USA (multistate (03) 20070922.3152
Pet food alert - USA (multistate) (02) 20070918.3095
Pet food alert - USA (multistate) 20070915.3067
Contaminated pet food - China: melamine 20070430.1403
Contaminated pet food - USA, Canada, Mexico (03): swine 20070427.1380
Contaminated pet food - USA, Canada, Mexico (02): swine 20070426.1366
Contaminated pet food - USA, Canada, Mexico: Swine 20070425.1353
Pet food fatalities, pets - USA, Canada, Mexico (03): melamine 20070330.1099
Pet food fatalities, pets - USA, Canada, Mexico (02): aminopterin 20070325.1040
Pet food fatalities, pets - USA, Canada, Mexico: recall 20070318.0946
...................................tg/mj/lm

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
