<header id=017044>
Published Date: 2011-08-18 10:02:08 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Eastern equine encephalitis - USA (06): (NY) human, fatal
Archive Number: 20110818.2504
</header>
<body id=017044>
EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS - USA (06): (NEW YORK) HUMAN, FATAL
***************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 16 Aug 2011
Source: The Palladium Times [edited]
http://palltimes.com/articles/2011/08/17/news/doc4e4b18fe44133469366858.txt


Two days after a New Haven girl succumbed to [an] eastern equine
encephalitis (EEE) [virus infection], a news conference was held
Tuesday [16 Aug 2011] by the county Health Department announcing that
the county has taken steps in preparation of spraying areas affected
by the virus. Dr Dennis Norfleet, the director of public health for
Oswego County, and County Administrator Phil Church held the press
conference late Tuesday afternoon [16 Aug 2011] at the county Health
Department building, on Bunner Street, in Oswego. The child, of New
Haven, passed away Sunday morning [14 Aug 2011] at Upstate Golisano
Children's Hospital, in Syracuse, after being bitten by an infected
mosquito.

On Monday [15 Aug 2011], Norfleet had issued a release stating that
the county would not spray affected areas because there was a lower
mosquito [EEE virus] infection rate this year [2011]. On Tuesday [16
Aug 2011], he announced that he had submitted a letter to the New York
State Department of Health declaring an emergency as to allow aerial
spraying in areas where high concentrations of mosquitoes carrying EEE
[virus] have been found. The health director said that the decision to
conduct aerial spraying to help eliminate some of the infected
mosquitoes was not the result of public outcry after the youngster's
death, but insisted it was based on science. He noted during the last
2 years in central New York, the cases of the virus that were found
were contracted after spraying had been conducted.

"I think it is very important that people understand that spraying is
based on scientific data that comes in," Norfleet said. "We do not do
this in an emotional fashion. We make the determination on the
information that we gathered about where the mosquitoes are and what
is evident about the EEE virus being spread in the county."

The 1st 2 cases of EEE in Oswego County this year [2011] were reported
28 Jul [2011], and came from the testing areas of Toad Harbor/Big Bay
Swamp, in Hastings, and in Palermo, Norfleet said. It also has been
detected in Central Square, Volney, Albion, and Scriba. Additional
positive reports for the virus were reported 2 Aug and 12 Aug [2011],
with more coming in Tuesday [16 Aug 2011] from the Toad Harbor Swamp
area and a new location, near Paradise Road, in Palermo. The health
director also noted that a horse perished from the disease prior to
the child's passing Sunday [14 Aug 2011].

Members of the child's family said at the news conference that if
spraying had been completed earlier this summer [2011], they believe
their little girl would still be with them today. They also wanted the
public to know that it took the 4-year-old a week to succumb to the
effects of the disease. One minute she was playing, the next she was
suffering from a seizure because her brain had swollen as a result of
the virus, one family member said.

Aerial spraying is not a permanent fix to stop the virus, the health
director pointed out. "Spraying -- when we do spray -- is only a
partial and temporary measure. It only knocks down the mosquitoes who
are out there at the time of the spraying," Norfleet said. "They will
re-emerge within a week or 2 thereafter. It does not kill the virus in
those mosquitoes [nor in the avian reservoir hosts. - Mod.TY] The
mosquitoes that re-emerge can go out and bite infected birds and bring
it back again."

He has been in contact with the Department of Environmental
Conservation, and also informed the county's contractor that spraying
will need to be done. Additional surveillance areas in the county are
in the process of being added, Norfleet said. There is currently not a
trap set up in New Haven, where the fatal case was from. He previously
noted that it is unknown where the little girl was bitten.

"This is a very unusual pattern for us to see because we saw EEE
[virus] going up in our mosquito surveillance program, not just our
Big Bay area, but several areas of the county all at once. ... In
order for spraying to happen, the weather pattern has to be just
right. ... The temperature and humidity have to be right," Norfleet
said. "It's out there. It seems to be wider. Statewide, we're seeing
it spread further west and further east than we have seen before. ...
We have to assume there will be a threat out there until we have some
serious cold weather."

According to the health director, his department tries to contain the
virus in the swamp areas, but this year [2011], it has spread across
the county. The mosquitoes carrying the virus -- which contract EEE
primarily from infected birds -- can travel up to 9 miles [14.5 km],
Norfleet said. He noted that the Health Department originally was not
too concerned with the virus after the early period of wetness during
the spring had dried up and was followed by a long spell of dry
weather, which is not conducive for mosquitoes to thrive in.

Norfleet pointed out that EEE is a rare virus and that many people
have been bitten by mosquitoes that carry it. Most people's immune
systems are strong enough to not let them contract the virus. Those
most susceptible include people who are younger than 15, older than
50, and those with other underlying diseases or health issues. "It is
a rare individual who will actually contract the virus that results in
serious illness, eastern equine encephalitis, the inflammation of the
brain," he said. "There is no specific treatment for it. ... This is
one of the very sorry things about it -- there is nothing to pull off
the shelf."

Norfleet said that the most important message is for area residents to
take personal protective measures when remaining outdoors as to not
get bitten by mosquitoes. They include: trying to limit time outside
near dusk and dawn, when mosquitoes are most active; wearing shoes,
socks, long pants with bottoms tucked into boots or socks and a
long-sleeved T-shirt when outdoors for a significant period of time or
near dawn or dusk; using mosquito repellent over clothes. Repellents
containing DEET are the most effective. Be sure to read directions
carefully, as each repellant has different concentrations of DEET.
Repair or replace broken screens in doors and windows.

[Byline: Erin Place]
--
Communicated by:
Richard J Pollack, PhD
Harvard School of Public Health
Boston University
<rpollack@hsph.harvard.edu>

[This report provides good examples of the complications involved in
the decision to carry out vector control and the limitations that
insecticide spraying have for control of virus transmission. In the
absence of a commercially available vaccine for humans, avoidance of
mosquito bites is the only preventive measure available. This requires
an effective public education effort on the part of public health
authorities and compliance on the part of individual residents in
areas of risk.

Maps showing the location of Oswego county can be accessed at
http://healthmap.org/r/18gY and
http://www.digital-topo-maps.com/county-map/new-york.shtml. -
Mod.TY]
See Also
Eastern equine encephalitis - USA (05): (NY) human, fatal 20110817.2489
Eastern equine encephalitis - USA (04): (NY) human 20110814.2462
Eastern equine encephalitis - USA (03): (WI) equine, alpaca 20110811.2434
Eastern equine encephalitis - USA (02): (WA) corr. 20110807.2395
Eastern equine encephalitis - USA (02): (NY) 20110807.2387
Eastern equine encephalitis - USA: (FL) 20110729.2272
.................................................mpp/ty/mj/mpp
</body>
