<header id=018994>
Published Date: 2005-10-15 19:50:00 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Poliovirus isolation, vaccine strain - USA (02)
Archive Number: 20051015.3003
</header>
<body id=018994>
POLIOVIRUS ISOLATION, VACCINE STRAIN - USA (02)
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>
Sponsored by Elsevier, publisher of
The Journal of Hospital Infection
<http://thelancet.url123.com/a5wh7>
Date: 14 Oct 2005
From: ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>
Source: MMWR 2005; 54(Dispatch):1-3, 14 Oct [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm54d1014a1.htm>

On September 29, 2005, the Minnesota Department of Health
(MDH) identified poliovirus type 1 in an unvaccinated,
immunocompromised infant girl aged 7 months (the index
patient) in an Amish community whose members predominantly
were unvaccinated for polio. The patient has no paralysis;
the source of the patient's infection is unknown.
Subsequently, poliovirus infections in 3 other children
within the index patient's community have been documented.
This report summarizes the ongoing investigation, provides
information regarding poliovirus exposure risks and
prevention measures in the United States, and offers
recommendations to state healthdepartments and clinicians.
Index case summary
------------------
The index patient was first admitted to a community hospital
in central Minnesota for pneumonia in July 2005. Since 22
Aug, this infant has been hospitalized continuously at 3
additional hospitals with failure to thrive, diarrhea, and
recurrent infections. The infant was placed in strict
isolation, and a diagnosis of severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) was made on 15 Sep [2005]. The
infant is being clinically managed with intravenous
immunoglobulin therapy and is being evaluated for bone
marrow transplantation.
Laboratory investigation
------------------------
An enterovirus isolate from a stool specimen obtained on 27
Aug 2005 tested positive for a type 1 poliovirus at the MDH
laboratory. Partial sequencing of the virus capsid protein
coding region (VP1) of the poliovirus genome at the MDH
laboratory identified it as a vaccine-derived poliovirus
(VDPV). VDPVs are poliovirus strains derived from one of the
3 Sabin poliovirus strains in oral polio vaccine (OPV) that
have greater than one per cent difference in nucleotide
sequence from the prototype vaccine virus (1). Additional
sequencing of the entire poliovirus genome at the CDC polio
laboratory confirmed that this strain was a VDPV, with 2.3
per cent divergence in the VP1 region from the parent Sabin
type 1 strain. The viral genome demonstrates no
recombination with other polioviruses or species C
enteroviruses. Prospective serial stool samples from the
infant are being tested to monitor ongoing infection and
further mutations in the virus.
Epidemiologic investigation
---------------------------
Because viral genomic data suggest this poliovirus might
have been transmitted to the index patient from another
immunocompromised person, the initial investigation focused
on identifying immunodeficient persons among community
contacts, health care workers, and patients with whom the
infant had potential contact before the 1st positive
poliovirus culture on 27 Aug [2005]. Staff and patient
records at the hospitals are being reviewed, and inquiries
are being made with community members and health care
providers.
Investigations also are under way at the 4 hospitals where
the infant has been treated to determine whether nosocomial
transmission from the infant has occurred. At the hospital
where the infant currently is a patient, health care workers
and other staff members who have had exposure (without
protection from contact precautions) to the infant or the
infant's environment are being surveyed regarding polio
vaccination status, immune status, and recent relevant
illnesses in themselves and their family members. Stool
samples are being obtained for viral cultures. Vaccination
with inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) is being offered to
health-care workers who might have been exposed or who have
an ongoing risk for exposure and whose polio vaccination
status is not up to date or is unknown. Stool specimens also
are being obtained from potentially exposed patients at the
hospital where the infant currently is a patient. At the 1st
3 hospitals where the infant was admitted, health-care
workers are being surveyed regarding immune status and
recent illness in themselves or their family members.
To examine community transmission of poliovirus, family
members and others in the index patient's community are
being surveyed regarding polio vaccination status, immune
status, and recent illnesses. To date, stool samples have
been collected from 32 persons in 5 of 24 households, and
serum samples have been obtained from 8 persons in 3
households, including the index patient's household.
Poliovirus type 1 has been confirmed in 3 of 32 stool
specimens; partial sequencing of the VP1 region of these 3
isolates has indicated they also are VDPV type 1. The
positive specimens were obtained from 3 unvaccinated
siblings in one household (not the infant's household). None
of these 3 children has been ill recently, and none was
immunocompromised. Stool and serum samples are being
requested from additional members of the community. Extended
family members and community contacts from other areas who
might have come into contact with the index patient are
being identified and monitored for illness. IPV is being
offered to community members who are not fully vaccinated
for polio or whose polio vaccination status is unknown.
Hospitals that serve this community and similar communities
are being contacted, and retrospective and prospective
surveillance is identifying patients whose diagnoses
indicate conditions that are clinically consistent with
poliovirus infection, including acute flaccid paralysis
(AFP), Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS), transverse myelitis,
and viral or aseptic meningitis.
Reported by: L Bahta, J Bartkus, PhD, J Besser, MS, N
Crouch, PhD, E Cebelinski, K Ehresmann, MPH, S Fuller, K
Harriman PhD, J Harper, MS, H Hull, MD, R Lynfield, MD, C
Miller, MS, J Rainbow, MPH, M Sullivan, MPH, G Wax, MPH,
Minnesota Dept of Health; P Ackerman, Children's Hospital
and Clinics of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Div of Viral and
Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases; Epidemiology and Surveillance Div, National
Immunization Program; A Parker, MSN, MPH, EIS Officer, CDC.
MMWR editorial note:
--------------------
The findings in this report are the 1st identification of a
VDPV in the United States and the 1st occurrence of VDPV
transmission in a community since OPV vaccinations were
discontinued in 2000 (2-4). The extent of circulation within
the affected community is not yet known. However, the
identification of poliovirus infection in the index patient
and 3 other unvaccinated children in a community at high
risk for poliovirus transmission raises concerns regarding
1) transmission to other communities with low levels of
vaccination and 2) the risk for a polio outbreak occurring
in the United States. Potential also exists for transmission
of this virus to other immunodeficient persons. Although
this VDPV has not been associated with paralytic disease,
based on previous experience with VDPVs, the virus is
considered to have potential both for wider transmission and
for causing paralytic disease.
VDPVs emerge from OPV viruses as a result of 1) their
continuous replication in immunodeficient persons
(immunodeficiency-associated or iVDPVs) such as the index
patient in this investigation or 2) their circulation in
populations with low vaccination coverage (circulating or
cVDPVs) (1). During community circulation, cVDPVs often
recombine with other species C enteroviruses, which is not
characteristic for iVDPVs (1). Because polioviruses
accumulate nucleotide changes at a constant rate of mutation
(about 1 per cent per year), the time of replication can be
inferred from the degree of divergence (1). Because cVDPVs
commonly revert to a wild poliovirus phenotype, they can
have increased transmissibility and high risk for paralytic
disease; cVDPVs have caused outbreaks of poliomyelitis in
several countries (1). VDPVs in highly immunized populations
are rare. Before the VDPV identification in Minnesota, the
most recent known VDPV excreter in the United States was a
child with SCID (now deceased) who developed
vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis in 1995 (4).
Given the degree of difference (2.3 per cent) from the
parent Sabin poliovirus type 1 strain, the virus isolated
from the index patient is estimated to have been replicating
for about 2 years, which means the virus likely is older
than the infant. OPV is still widely used in most countries;
however, because OPV has not been used in the United States
since 2000 and in Canada since 1997, the original source of
this virus likely was a person who received OPV in another
country. Neither the infant nor her family members had any
history of international travel. This virus is not related
to other known iVDPVs or to any type 1 cVDPVs that caused
outbreaks such as those in Hispaniola during 2000-2001, the
Philippines during 2001 (1), or Indonesia during 2005.
Most poliovirus infections are asymptomatic or cause mild,
febrile disease. Poliovirus infections occasionally cause
aseptic meningitis, and one out of 200 infections from
poliovirus type 1 results in paralytic poliomyelitis,
characterized by acute onset of flaccid paralysis that is
typically asymmetric and associated with a prodromal fever.
Poliovirus is spread through fecal material, oral
secretions, and fomites. Widespread transmission among
vaccinated health-care workers or in a community with high
vaccination coverage is unlikely because fully vaccinated
persons are not at risk for disease from this or other
polioviruses and seldom shed the virus for longer than a
week if they are infected. The National Immunization Survey
reports that polio vaccination coverage in Minnesota is 93
per cent for children aged 19-35 months and 98 per cent for
school-aged children; however, communities of unvaccinated
persons exist in Minnesota and many other states (5). The
risk for transmission in communities with low vaccination
coverage is high. The estimated rate of transmission for
wild poliovirus among unvaccinated household contacts is
73-96 per cent (6). Contacts between persons in communities
with low vaccination coverage pose the potential for
transmission of this poliovirus to other communities in the
United States, Canada, and other countries.
The last wild poliovirus outbreak in the United States
occurred in 1979 and was caused by a wild type 1 poliovirus.
In that outbreak, 10 paralytic poliomyelitis cases and 4
other poliovirus infections occurred among unvaccinated
Amish persons and members of other religious communities
with low levels of vaccination who lived in Iowa, Missouri,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin. The source of this outbreak was
traced to religious groups in Canada and the Netherlands
that also had low levels of vaccination (7). A polio
outbreak in 1993 in the Netherlands with 71 paralytic cases
among members of unvaccinated religious communities also
resulted in poliovirus transmission without paralytic
disease in Alberta, Canada; no evidence of transmission from
this outbreak was found in the United States (8).
Persons in communities with low vaccination coverage should
be warned of the potential risk for poliomyelitis. States
with large communities with low vaccination coverage should
identify these communities, assess their current vaccination
status, and offer IPV. These states also should establish
enhanced or active surveillance for AFP, GBS, and transverse
myelitis. Physicians should be aware of and vigilant for
poliomyelitis and other causes of AFP in patients. Stool
samples, throat swabs, cerebrospinal fluid, and serum should
be collected for viral culture and serology from these
patients. With evidence of transmission in Minnesota,
serologic and/or stool surveys to detect poliovirus type 1
circulation in affiliated communities with low levels of
vaccination also should be considered.
IPV, the polio vaccine currently used in the United States,
provides immunity against this vaccine-derived poliovirus
strain. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) recommends that a full 3-dose IPV series be
administered on an accelerated schedule if polio
immunization status is unknown or not documented (9). A
booster dose of IPV is recommended for adults in susceptible
communities and health care workers at high risk for
exposure who have completed a primary series but have not
received an adult booster dose.
References
1. Kew O, Wright P, Agol V, et al. Circulating
vaccine-derived polioviruses: current state of knowledge.
Bull World Health Organ 2004; 82: 16-23.
2. Halsey N, Pinto J, Espinosa-Rosales F, et al. Search for
poliovirus carriers among people with primary immune
deficiency diseases in the United States, Mexico, Brazil,
and the United Kingdom. Bull World Health Organ 2004; 82:
3-8.
3. Kew O, Sutter R, Nottay B, et al. Prolonged replication
of a type 1 vaccine-derived poliovirus in an immunodeficient
patient. J Clin Microbiol 1998; 36: 2893-9.
4. Khetsuriani N, Prevots DR, Quick L, et al. Persistence
of vaccine-derived polioviruses among immunodeficient
persons with vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis. J
Infect Dis 2003; 188: 1845-52.
5. CDC. Estimated vaccination coverage with individual
vaccines and selected vaccination series among children
19--35 months of age by state and immunization action plan
area: US National Immunization Survey, 2004. Atlanta, GA:
CDC; 2005. Available at:
<http://www.cdc.gov/nip/coverage/nis/04/tab02_antigen_iap.xls>.
6. Zimmerman K, Middleton D, Burns I, Clover R. Routine
vaccines across the life span, 2003 clinical review. J Fam
Pract 2003; 52(suppl 1): s1-s21.
7. CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports:
poliomyelitis---United States, Canada. MMWR 1997; 46:
1194-5.
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00050429.htm>
8. CDC. Current trends lack of evidence for wild poliovirus
circulation -- United States, 1993. MMWR 1995; 43: 957-9.
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00035463.htm>
9. CDC. Poliomyelitis prevention in the United States.
Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2000; 49(No.RR-5).
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr4905a1.htm>
--
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>
[We await further information on results of ongoing studies
mentioned above. - Mod.MPP]
See Also
Poliovirus isolation, vaccine strain - USA 20051014.2996
Poliovirus isolation, vaccine strain - USA (MN): RFI
20051002.2884
....................mpp/pg/sh
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org
(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.
############################################################
############################################################
</body>
