<header id=022848>
Published Date: 2011-09-04 19:03:48 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (03): (KS, MT)
Archive Number: 20110904.2704
</header>
<body id=022848>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (03): (KANSAS, MONTANA)
********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1] EHD Kansas
Date: 1 Sep 2011
Source: InfoZine [edited]
http://www.infozine.com/news/stories/op/storiesView/sid/48839/


Late August through early October is a time when people occasionally
see sick and dead deer and wonder what is happening. The disease most
often associated with these losses is a caused by virus and called
hemorrhagic disease (HD). It is transmitted to deer and other ruminant
animals by biting midges. People and their pets are not affected by
this virus, and the disease stops in the fall after cold weather kills
the midges.

The Kansas Department of Wildlife, Parks and Tourism (KDWPT) is asking
anyone who sees a sick or dead deer to contact local KDWPT staff and
report where and how many deer are involved. So far this year [2011],
KDWPT has received reports from 12 counties in eastern Kansas, and
most of these reports involve a single sick or dead deer. Samples have
been submitted to the Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study
at the University of Georgia. Initial results from 2 cases confirmed
that the virus involved in this year's cases is epizootic hemorrhagic
disease virus (EHDV), serotype 2. (A serotype is a distinct variation
within a subspecies of the virus.)

There are 2 related viruses that may cause HD; epizootic hemorrhagic
disease virus (EHDV) and bluetongue virus (BTV). In the US, there are
multiple serotypes of both EHDV (EHDV-1 and -2) and BTV (BTV-2, -10,
-11, -13, and -17). Although all of these viruses can cause HD, the
virus and serotype most often associated with death of deer is EHDV-2.
Both BTV and EHDV infect cattle, but in North America, clinical
disease in infected cattle is rare and generally mild. Sheep are not
affected by EHDV, but severe disease can be caused by BTV. Midges can
carry both viruses and feed on many species of ruminants, and the
viruses may produce a variety of symptoms in deer.

When HD occurs, people normally find sick and dead deer along streams
or near ponds. Midges reproduce in stagnant water, and deer are often
found near those sites in the late summer. Deer with HD frequently
have a high temperature and allow people to get very close to them.
The deer may be standing or lying down, and they occasionally have an
open mouth with their tongue hanging out and swollen.

The clinical signs of HD in deer can be highly variable depending on
the virulence of the virus in a particular location or year and the
susceptibly and immunity of the deer herd.

In late August 2011, sick Kansas deer have responded severely to the
disease. These animals will generally die within a couple days after
they 1st show clinical signs. That does not mean that all deer
infected with the virus will die. Some deer will not show any
symptoms, and their immune system will produce antibodies for this
virus. Those antibodies give the deer protection from the disease in
future years. Other deer will survive the initial problems with the
virus but still develop chronic hemorrhagic disease.

The chronic signs typically observed by hunters in the winter or by
people who encounter a sick deer in the spring include fever rings on
the hooves (cracked or sloughed hooves on 3 or 4 feet) and emaciation.
Thin deer are generally the result of the disease's effects on the
lining of the rumen (a digestive organ similar to a stomach in other
animals). Those animals have no ability to digest food. Chronic HD can
further lower the immune response of deer and leave them vulnerable to
bacterial diseases such pneumonia.

There are no effective treatments or vaccines for HD. Even if there
were, it would be nearly impossible to treat enough wild deer to have
any effect on the annual outcomes of this disease. Some individual
deer have high levels of immunity to the disease. Deer in western
Kansas generally have antibodies for various serotypes of HD, and a
significant die-off in that area is rare. Deer in eastern Kansas
generally do not have antibodies for the disease, and when events like
the one this year [2011] occur, there can be high numbers of sick and
dead deer.

The best advice for people concerned about HD on their land is to make
sure deer are not concentrated at feeders and that they are not being
fed high levels of corn, which may lower their ability to mount an
immune response if they become infected.

KDWPT will monitor the spread and extent of HD this year [2011]. "HD
probably occurs to some extent every year in Kansas," explains Lloyd
Fox, big game program coordinator for the agency. "Occasionally, there
are years when the disease causes high mortality. This disease has
been known to kill as many as 10 percent to 50 percent of a local deer
herd. The department adjusts future management, such as
antlerless-only seasons and numbers of permits, as a result of those
events."

Fox explained that HD is a traditional disease of deer, and while
there may be high numbers of dead deer in a particular area, the deer
herd will generally repopulate the area within a few years.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] EHD Montana
Date: 30 Aug 2011
Source: Liberty County Times [edited]
http://highline.townnews.com/articles/2011/08/30/news/news6.txt?


Dead white-tailed deer, probably killed by epizootic hemorrhagic
disease, or EHD, have been reported in Chouteau County near Fort
Benton, state wildlife officials say.

The disease, which is spread by biting midges, was reported 1st in
eastern Montana. Now it has moved west, also killing whitetails in
Petroleum and Fergus counties, both in Fish, Wildlife and Parks'
Region 4.

EHD is spread among deer, primarily whitetails, by biting midges. It
is one of several hemorrhagic disease viruses found in wild and
domestic ruminants. A related disease, bluetongue virus, affects
domestic livestock. While EHD can also infect livestock, it has not
been proven to spread from deer to livestock or vice versa. The
disease poses no threat to humans.

High density deer herds may have higher mortality rates; however, the
relationship of deer density to the severity of EHD is not clear cut.
Wildlife officials believe that, while the EHD outbreak is widespread
in Montana, it is not killing a high percentage of white-tailed deer.
Spread of the disease normally stops when the 1st frost of autumn
kills the offending midges.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[EHD is transmitted by biting midges. The opening line of the 1st
article implies that deer at a deer feeder may spread the disease, as
if the disease is transmitted by contact. The disease is not spread by
contact but by insect vectors. Allegedly, the vectors are attracted by
carbon dioxide, so perhaps there is a slightly higher concentration of
the gas if the animals are in a group. So, the supposition here
regarding the feeding of deer seems a bit out of line.

The 2nd article indicates that the relationship between larger
gatherings of deer and the disease is unclear. As mentioned in the
previous paragraph, there may be a slightly higher concentration of
carbon dioxide, but this is theory and has not been proven. - Mod.TG]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ) 20110826.2601
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
2010
----
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (04): (NJ) 20101022.3823
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (03): (MI) 20101001.3565
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (02): (MT) 20100923.3433
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, bovine - Guadeloupe: OIE 20100904.3175
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA: (IL) 20100819.2880
.................................................sb/tg/msp/dk
</body>
