<header id=050848>
Published Date: 2011-09-30 07:37:14 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed hemorrhagic disease - Namibia: (Windhoek) RFI
Archive Number: 20110930.2951
</header>
<body id=050848>
UNDIAGNOSED HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE - NAMIBIA: (WINDHOEK) REQUEST FOR
INFORMATION
*****************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 29 Sep 2011
Source: New Era [edited]
http://www.newera.com.na/article.php?articleid=40894


Mysterious disease kills 4
--------------------------
Four Hakahana residents died from a mysterious illness that caused a
strange rash and caused hemorrhaging through the nose, eyes, and other
body openings. 3 died over the past 3 days while 2 shack dwellers are
fighting for their lives in a city hospital and several others have
been discharged from hospital. One died last week [week of 19 Sep
2011].

The strange disease that causes its victims to bleed and pass
excessive blood in their urine and fecal matter has left doctors at
Katutura State Hospital baffled. Medical authorities are also trying
to find the source of the swiftly-killing disease that has struck
terror at Hakahana.

Among those who died in the last 3 days are one man, one woman, and a
child. When New Era visited the bereaved families yesterday [28 Sep
2011] together with the Moses Garoeb Constituency councillor, Martin
David, the families of the deceased were still in shock at the sudden
death of their beloved ones.

[A man] said his shebeen [bar] attendant went to see him before her
demise complaining of a splitting headache and he told her to go to
hospital. "After she went to the hospital she started to develop red
pimples on the whole body, the same afternoon she started vomiting
blood, bleeding through the anus," he said. She started complaining
last Thursday evening [22 Sep 2011] and went to Katutura hospital on
Friday but was sent back home as nurses said she was in a stable
condition. But on Sunday [25 Sep 2011] at around 11 pm her relatives
called him saying she was critical and she died upon arrival at
Katutura State Hospital where she had been admitted. According to a
family member of the deceased, the woman died on Monday [26 Sep 2011],
and they are still shocked by the death because they had not
experienced a disease with such symptoms before.

New Era has learnt that another of the victims also died yesterday
[Wed 28 Sep 2011] after displaying similar symptoms. The victim was
also a resident of Hakahana. The residents said they now live in fear
because they do not know what exactly is causing the sudden deaths.

Councillor David has his own theories about the deaths saying it could
be that the victims ate poisoned food scavenged from one of the
dumpsites. A mourner at one of the funerals said: "We are still
waiting from the doctors to identify the cause of the deaths but for
now we are very scared." Residents appealed to the Ministry of Health
and Social Services to urgently investigate the disease and inform the
public on how to prevent it so that they could take precautionary
measures. "The ministry must investigate so that they can introduce
campaigns of injecting or whatever they can do for us to prevent this
serious outbreak. People are dying in a short period," said one
resident.

Another child died last week [week of 19 Sep 2011] in the same
neighbourhood when he started passing blood-tainted urine and his
mother took him to hospital, bringing to 4 the number of victims. 2
people who are hospitalised are also bleeding from the eyes and
urinating blood and have symptoms similar to those who died.

Approached for comment, the permanent secretary in the Ministry of
Health and Social Services, Kahijoro Kahuure, said he had not been
informed about the illness.

[Byline: Loide Jason, Fifi Rhodes]

--
Communicated by:
Ronan Kelly
for FluTrackers.com
<ronankelly@comcast.net>

[Hakahana is a suburb of Windhoek, the capital of Namibia. The
township is situated in the north of the town. The
HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Namibia, showing the location
of Windhoek, can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/1i9l.

The undiagnosed fatal hemorrhagic disease, which has caused the death
of 4 people in a suburb of Windhoek, has some features characteristic
of a viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF, such as for example Lassa fever).

Viruses causing hemorrhagic fever are initially transmitted to humans
when the activities of infected reservoir hosts or vectors and humans
overlap. The viruses carried in rodent reservoirs are transmitted when
humans have contact with urine, fecal matter, saliva, or other body
excretions from infected rodents. The viruses associated with
arthropod vectors are spread most often when the vector mosquito or
tick bites a human, or when a human crushes a tick. However, some of
these vectors may spread virus to animals, livestock, for example.
Humans then become infected when they care for or slaughter the
animals.

Specific signs and symptoms vary by the type of VHF, but initial signs
and symptoms often include marked fever, fatigue, dizziness, muscle
aches, loss of strength, and exhaustion. Patients with severe cases of
VHF often show signs of bleeding under the skin, in internal organs,
or from body orifices like the mouth, eyes, or ears. However, although
they may bleed from many sites around the body, patients rarely die
because of blood loss. Severely ill patient cases may also show shock,
nervous system malfunction, coma, delirium, and seizures. Some types
of viral hemorrhagic fever are associated with renal failure.

Although Rift Valley Fever and Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever have
been reported in Namibia in recent times, the cases described above
appear to be sporadic rather than clustered. Furthermore there is no
indication of nosocomial transmission of the condition. It is possible
that the victims may have been exposed to some environmental toxin,
which seems to be the local opinion. Further information would be
welcomed. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2010
----
Undiagnosed illness, schoolchildren - Namibia: (KA), RFI 20101105.4012
Meningitis, meningococcal - Namibia: fatal, RFI 20101007.3637
Rift Valley fever, human - Namibia (05): susp 20100906.3199
Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Namibia: (KA) 20100810.2732
Rift Valley fever, animal - Namibia (04): FAO 20100729.2550
.................................................cp/mj/lm
</body>
