<header id=046577>
Published Date: 2011-12-31 12:38:25 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Avian influenza, human (75): China (GG) H5N1
Archive Number: 20111231.3714
</header>
<body id=046577>
AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (75): CHINA (GUANGDONG), H5N1
****************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Sat 31 Dec 2011
Source: Asia Pacific News, Agence Fance-Presse report [edited]
http://www.channelnewsasia.com/stories/afp_asiapacific/view/1174126/1/.htm=

China reports first bird flu case in 18 months
----------------------------------------------
China has reported its first human case of bird flu[avian influenza
A/H5N1 influenza virus infection] in 18 months, after a bus driver in
the massive southern boomtown of Shenzhen tested positive for the
deadly virus. The city borders Hong Kong, which has already culled
thousands of chickens and ordered a suspension of live poultry imports
from the mainland after 3 birds tested positive for the H5N1 strain of
the virus in mid-December [2011].

The victim developed a fever on 21 Dec 2011 and was taken to hospital
on 25 Dec 2011 and diagnosed with severe pneumonia, said the health
department in Shenzhen, a city of more than 10 million. The
39-year-old later tested positive for the H5N1 avian influenza virus,
the department said in a statement posted online late Friday [30 Dec
2011]. He was in critical condition and receiving emergency treatment.
Authorities said the man had apparently had no direct contact with
poultry in the month before he was taken ill, nor had he left the
city.

The H5N1 virus is fatal in humans in about 60 percent of cases. There
tends to be a spike in infections during the early months of the year.
Symptoms include fever, coughing, a sore throat, pneumonia and
respiratory disease. However, it does not pass easily from human to
human, and the World Health Organization says it has never identified
a "sustained human-to-human spread" of the virus since it re-emerged
in 2003.

Chinese and Hong Kong authorities have been working closely together
since 21 Dec 2011 after live poultry supplies were suspended to the
glitzy financial hub [i.e. Hong Kong] following the discovery of
infected birds. A spokesman for the Hong Kong health department said
in a statement authorities would heighten their vigilance "and
continue to maintain stringent port health measures in connection with
this development." Health authorities in China have also vowed to stay
in "close contact and work together" with Hong Kong and "jointly step
up measures in controlling the epidemic", the official Xinhua news
agency said.

China is considered one of the nations most at risk of bird flu
epidemics because it has the world's biggest poultry population and
many chickens in rural areas are kept close to humans. In the last
reported human case in China, a young pregnant woman died of bird flu
in June 2010 in the central province of Hubei. Her death brought to 26
the number of people who have died in China since 2003, out of 40
reported human cases, according to the World Health Organization.

Authorities in Hong Kong have raised the bird flu alert level to
"serious" since they discovered infected chickens, resulting in major
disruptions to poultry supplies over the busy Christmas period; 2
schools were ordered to close after dead birds infected with the virus
were found on their premises.

Hong Kong was the site of the world's first major outbreak of bird flu
among humans in 1997, when 6 people died. Millions of birds were then
culled. The avian influenza virus has killed more than 330 people
around the world, with Indonesia the worst-hit country. Most human
infections are the result of direct contact with infected birds.

Scientists fear H5N1 could mutate into a form readily transmissible
between humans, with the potential to cause millions of deaths.
Highlighting those fears, the World Health Organization said on Friday
[30 Dec 2011] that it was "deeply concerned" about research into
whether H5N1 could be made more transmissible between humans after
mutant strains were produced in labs. Two separate research teams --
one in the Netherlands and the other in the USA -- separately found
ways to alter the virus H5N1 so it could pass easily between mammals.

Hong Kong is particularly nervous about infectious diseases after an
outbreak of the respiratory disease SARS in 2003 killed 300 people in
the city and a further 500 worldwide. A 59-year-old woman tested
positive for bird flu in 2010 in Hong Kong's first human case of the
illness since 2003.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall


******
[2]
Date:Fri 30 Dec 2011
Ssource: Reuters US [eedited]
http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/12/30/us-china-birdflu-idUSTRE7BT0WP20111230

China reports suspected human bird flu case
-------------------------------------------
China has reported a suspected human case of the H5N1 [avian
influenza] virus, or bird flu, in a southern city bordering Hong Kong,
officials said on Friday [30 Dec 2011]. The patient, a 39-year-old man
living in Shenzhen, developed symptoms on 21 Dec 2011 and was admitted
to a hospital on 25 Dec 2011 because of severe pneumonia, the Centre
of Health Protection of Hong Kong said in a statement. He is now in
critical condition. China's Ministry of Health said preliminary
laboratory tests on the patient's specimen by the Centre for Disease
Control and Prevention of Guangdong Province had yielded a positive
result for H5N1.

About 10 days ago Hong Kong culled 17 000 chickens at a wholesale
poultry market and suspended all imports of live chickens from
mainland China for 21 days after a dead chicken there tested positive
for the H5N1 virus. The virus is normally found in birds but can jump
to people who do not have immunity to it, and researchers worry it
could mutate into a form that would spread around the world and kill
millions of people.

In recent years, the virus has become active in various parts of the
world, mainly in east Asia, during the cooler months. Authorities in
China are especially worried about the spread of infectious diseases
around this time when millions of Chinese travel in crowded buses and
trains across the country to go home to celebrate the Lunar New Year.

The current strain of H5N1 is highly pathogenic [in birds], kills most
species of birds and up to 60 percent of the people it infects. Since
2003, it has infected 573 people around the world, killing 336. The
virus also kills migratory birds but species that manage to survive
can carry and disperse the virus to new, uninfected locations.

The virus can kill birds and humans in a matter of days but can
survive far longer durations in a moist, cool environment. It
transmits less easily [almost never] between people but there have
been clusters of infections in people in Indonesia and Thailand in the
past, where the virus is believed to have been passed between family
members through direct contact with contaminated respiratory
secretions.

(By Alison Leung; Editing by Alessandra Rizzo)

--
Communicated by:
Nati Elkin
nati@poultrymed.com

[China is one of 15 countries which have reported human cases of avian
H/(H5N1) virus infection. The World Health Orgaisation (WHO) table of
the Cumulative number of confirmed human cases for avian influenza
A(H5N1) (2003-2011)
http://www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/H5N1_cumulative_table_archives/en/index.html)
indicates that as of 15 Dec 2011 there had been 40 cases with 26
fatalities in China since 2003, compared with the global total of 573
cases and 336 fatalities. The case described above brings the number
of cases in China to 41. It remains to be seen whether the current
case will add to the number of fatalites.

So far there has been no evidence of sustained transmission of
infection from person-to-person and in almost all cases there has been
evidence of contact with diseased poultry. The current case in
Shenzhen appears to be exceptional in the latter respect, and will
remain a cause for concern until this case has is fully investigated.

The city of Shenzhen can be located by accessing the HealthMap
interactive map of the Chinese province of Guangdong at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1AXb. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Avian influenza (75): China (HK) H5N1, poultry, wild bird 20111224.3666
Avian influenza, human (73): China, live poultry markets 20111218.3625
Avian influenza, human (72): China (HK), human NOT 20111216.3611
Avian influenza (77): China, H5N1, OIE 20111214.3592
Avian influenza (71): world update, FAO, China 20111119.3407
.................................................cp/jw
</body>
