<header id=012780>
Published Date: 2011-08-07 09:05:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed disease, ovine, caprine - Pakistan: (PB) RFI
Archive Number: 20110807.2390
</header>
<body id=012780>
UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE, OVINE, CAPRINE - PAKISTAN: (PUNJAB), REQUEST FOR
INFORMATION
*********************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 5 Aug 2011
Source: Dawn Com (Pakistan) [edited]
http://www.dawn.com/2011/08/05/infectious-disease-attacks-cattle.html


An infectious disease has attacked goats and sheep in the district.
Pimples have appeared on the outer lips of young goats and lambs
causing maggots in them. The poor farmers are left high and dry, as
the veterinary department is not aware of the situation. The
veterinary department is not even ready to give a proper name to the
disease, but the farmers call it "Thaddi" in the local parlance [see
comment]. The affected animals are either dying or being purchased by
traders at throwaway prices.

According to the farmers, Thaddi attacks younger goats and lambs
during the monsoon season.

On Wednesday [3 Aug 2011], many disease-hit animals were seen at the
cattle market. "I planned to sell my 5 goats on the occasion of Eidul
Azha [Eid al-Adha, the Muslim Festival of Sacrifice] to get handsome
money, but now I'm left with no option but to sell them at whatever
rate, as all the 5 animals have been attacked by the disease," said
Shair Khan. "If I do not sell them off now, they will die soon, as
insects have penetrated into their mouths, and they are not able to
graze."

Other farmers were of the view that there was no proper cure for the
disease. They also said there were no precautionary measures to keep
the animals immune to the disease.

"My 2 lambs have died, and I have brought the remaining 6 animals here
to sell them," said another farmer, Afzal Khan, in the market. He said
Thaddi attacked the younger goats and lambs in Sawan (mid-July to
mid-August [2011]).

Taking advantage of the situation, traders are fleecing the poor
farmers by purchasing their ill animals at cheaper prices.

Interestingly, the meat of affected animals is sold at usual prices.
"We try to give a better price to the farmers, but at the same time,
if we do not buy their animals, they would die due to the disease,"
said Mohammad Farooq, a trader.

When contacted, senior veterinary officer Dr Mohammad Riaz Malik said
Thaddi was not a disease. Rather, the cattle [probably a translation
error; should read "small ruminants" or sheep and goats. - Mod.AS] got
their lips injured while trying to pluck thorny grass. "The younger
animals do not know what sort of grass they have to eat, and they also
pluck thorns, due to which their lips are injured, inviting maggots,"
he said. He said due to the rainy season, any wound on the animal's
body is prone to inviting worms. He also said most animals which were
under attack had been imported from the desert areas. "In desert
areas, thorny grass does not exist, but in Chakwal most of the grass
is thorny. That's why the new animals are not aware of how to eat the
grass."

On the other hand, Ghulam Rabani, a shepherd, said Thaddi was a fatal
disease which attacked the younger animals in rainy season.

[Byline: Nabeel Anwar Dhakku]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The above media report is somewhat confusing and suffers from
translational deficiencies at the source ("cattle," most probably, has
been erroneously applied instead of "small ruminants"). However, in
view of the possibility that an infectious disease is involved (see
further), we preferred to publish this (as an RFI).

According to available published information, the local (vernacular)
disease name "Thaddi" or "Thadi" means PPR (Peste des petits
ruminants; Ref 1) or rinderpest (Ref 2). Since sheep and goats are the
animals reportedly affected, rinderpest (a disease which predominantly
affects cattle, recently declared eradicated worldwide) is most
unlikely to be involved; however, a reassuring clarification will be
helpful. PPR (affecting small ruminants) is known to be endemic in the
Indian subcontinent, including Pakistan.

Professional, authoritative information on the identity of the disease
affecting small ruminants in Chakwal, a district in the Punjab
province (map at http://healthmap.org/r/170t), is requested.

References
1. Hussain et al (2005). Participatory Surveillance of Livestock
Diseases in Islamabad Capital Territory. Int. J. Agri. Biol., Vol. 7,
No. 4, pp 567-570. (see table II)
http://www.fspublishers.org/ijab/past-issues/IJABVOL_7_NO_4/9.pdf.

2. ALI et al. (2006). Participatory Surveillance of Livestock Diseases
in District Karachi, Pakistan. Int. J. Agri. Biol., Vol. 8, No. 5, pp
652-656 (see table II)
http://www.fspublishers.org/ijab/past-issues/IJABVOL_8_NO_5/20.pdf.
- Mod.AS]
See Also
Undiagnosed deaths, bovine - Pakistan: (SD), RFI 20110312.0801
2010
----
Undiagnosed deaths, ovine, caprine - Pakistan: (BA) RFI 20100403.1077
2009
----
Undiagnosed deaths, ibex - Pakistan (02): (SD) RFI 20091020.3613
Undiagnosed deaths, bovine - Pakistan: (FATA) RFI 20090309.0979
2008
----
Undiagnosed deaths, livestock - Pakistan (Sindh): RFI 20080916.2906
2007
----
Undiagnosed deaths, buffalo - Pakistan: (03) 20071201.3873
.................................................sb/arn/msp/dk
</body>
