<header id=021665>
Published Date: 2011-12-15 15:26:18 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed cerebral disease - Uganda: (PD) nodding disease
Archive Number: 20111215.3605
</header>
<body id=021665>
UNDIAGNOSED CEREBRAL DISEASE - UGANDA: (PADER) NODDING DISEASE
**************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 15 Dec 2011
Source: All Africa [edited]
http://allafrica.com/stories/201112080449.html


Uganda: Nodding Disease Death Toll in Pader At 66
-------------------------------------------------
As health experts remain puzzled about the mode of controlling the
spread of the nodding disease that has been devastating Pader
District, at least 66 children have been reported dead, leaving about
1500 others out of school in just 6 months.

A report by Trans-Cultural Psychosocial Organisation, an
non-governmental organization (NGO), reported that at least 1800 new
cases of the disease are reported after every 3 months, putting lives
of more children in the district at risk.

Nodding disease is a peculiar health problem that was 1st reported in
the district in 2008 and is characterised by head nodding, mental
retardation, stunted growth, blindness, body stiffness, endless
running nose and saliva, occasional defecation and urination during
attack of the infected person.

Many of the affected children are malnourished because eating food
seems to spark bouts of nodding and sometimes seizures. Epilepsy drugs
have been used to control the attacks but they do not cure the
disease, which has left many people perplexed, including medical
officers.

A 48-year-old woman of Atanga Sub-county, who has so far lost 2
children to the disease, said she fears that her only remaining
11-year-old child, who is also infected, could die soon.

Pader District Health Officer Janet Oola on Tuesday said the spread of
the disease is a great concern because it spreads so fast that about
1400 to 1600 infections were registered per day since August.

"The disease is so intense especially among children aged between 3-18
years and has spread to at least all sub-counties," Dr Oola said,
adding that despite using preventive drugs to treat the disease, more
infections continue to emerge.

According to Dr Oola, the disease has no known drugs but medicines
like Phenobarbitoin and Carbamaxpine that are used to treat its signs
and symptoms are expensive for the district to adequately supply to
the affected persons. She also noted that the disease can be prevented
by observing hygiene.

Pader LC5 Chairman Alfred Akena, however, said the district is in the
process of developing a paper that will help reduce the prevalence of
the disease. "We have called for regional meetings with all the
leaders in the region because the disease is a regional threat that
needs joint effort to kick it out."

The nodding disease is said to have 1st emerged in Sudan in the 1980s
and is currently restricted to small regions in South Sudan, Tanzania
and Uganda

--
Communicated by:
Mary Marshall
<mjm2020@googlemail.com>

[In 1962, several children with attacks of "nodding head" were
described in Mahenge, a village of southern Tanzania (Aall L. Epilepsy
in Tanganyika. Transcult Res Mental Hlth Prob 1962;13:54-7). Possible
causes have remained obscure, but over 40 percent of those with HN
seemed to have cognitive impairment (Winkler AS et al. Clinical
characteristics of people with head nodding in southern Tanzania. Trop
Doct. 2010;40:173-5).

Nodding Disease has been linked to onchocerciasis (Kipp W et al.
(1994) Onchocerciasis and epilepsy in Uganda. Lancet 1994;343:183-4;
and Kipp W et al. Improvement in seizures after ivermectin. Lancet
1992;340:789-790). However, a review of available studies concluded
that there was no solid evidence linking epilepsia to onchocerciasis
(Druet-Cabanac M et al. Review of epidemiological studies searching
for a relationship between onchocerciasis and epilepsy.
Neuroepidemiology. 2004;23:144-9).

A study which includes MRI results on 7 patients with Nodding Disease
(Head Nodding Syndrome) reported that 4 had a normal scan. Of the
rest, one had frontal release signs and the other three patients
showed hippocampus pathologies were seen (2 bilateral). In 2 patients,
there were additional gliotic lesions. Another study using
computerized tomography found evidence of neurocysticercosis as a
major course of epilepsia in a rural area of Tanzania (Winkler AS et
al. Epilepsy and neurocysticercosis in rural Tanzania-An imaging
study. Epilepsia. 2009;50:987-93).

Thus the disease remains elusive. However, looking at the present
outbreak both neurocysticercosis and onchocerciasis seems unlikely.
Both of these infections have long incubation periods and the parasite
burden slowly builds up and this does not fit with the present rapid
spreading outbreak.

An infectious disease seems unlikely. Rather a food borne illness for
instance caused by a toxin would present. Several toxins produce
encephalopathies in which myoclonus can be a prominent feature. These
include intoxications with bismuth, methyl bromide, cooking oil
containing anilines, and tetraethyl lead. The clinical features in
many cases resemble the action myoclonus syndrome of posthypoxic
encephalopathy (Obeso JA et al. Toxic myoclonus. Adv Neurol.
1986;43:225-30), and the Spanish Oil Syndrome also come into mind
(Fournier E et al. Spanish adulterated oil matter. An important
discovery by Spanish toxicologists: the toxicity of anilides of
unsaturated fatty acids. Toxicol Eur Res. 1982;4:107-12).

ProMED will be happy to post data on the patients line cerebral scans,
results of lumbar puncture and we hope the authorities will perform a
detailed case control investigation of relevant factors like food and
environmental exposures. HealthMap location:
http://healthmap.org/r/1xMp - Mod.EP]
See Also
2009
----
Undiagnosed cerebral disease - Uganda: (TG) nodding disease: 20090820.2952
2003
----
Undiagnosed cerebral disease, children - Sudan (02) 20030925.2423
Undiagnosed cerebral disease, children - Sudan 20030924.2417
.................................................ep/ejp/dk
</body>
