<header id=030665>
Published Date: 2010-03-11 14:00:03 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Crimean-Congo hem. fever, current situation - Europe
Archive Number: 20100311.0793
</header>
<body id=030665>
CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER, CURRENT SITUATION - EUROPE
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Thu 11 Mar 2010
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 15, Issue 10 [edited]
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19504>


Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever in Europe: current situation calls
for preparedness
------------------------------
By H C Maltezou 1, L Andonova2, R Andraghetti3, M Bouloy4, O
Ergonul5, F Jongejan6, N Kalvatchev7, S Nichol8, M Niedrig9, A
Platonov10, G Thomson11, K Leitmeyer12, H Zeller12 At: 1 Hellenic
Center for Diseases Control and Prevention, Athens, Greece, 2 Medical
University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3 World Health Organization, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 4 Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 5 Marmara University,
Istanbul, Turkey, 6 Utrecht Centre for Tick- borne Diseases, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands, 7 National Centre of Infectious
and Parasitic Diseases, Sofia, Bulgaria, 8 Centers of Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, United States, 9 Robert Koch Institute,
Berlin, Germany, 10 Central Research Institute of Epidemiology,
Moscow, Russian Federation, 11 Health Protection Agency, London,
United Kingdom, 12 European Centre for Disease Control and
Prevention, Stockholm, Sweden

Summary:

During the last decade, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF)
emerged and/or re-emerged in several Balkan countries, Turkey,
southwestern regions of the Russian Federation, and the Ukraine, with
considerable high fatality rates. Reasons for re-emergence of CCHF
include climate and anthropogenic factors such as changes in land
use, agricultural practices or hunting activities, movement of
livestock that may influence host-tick-virus dynamics. In order to be
able to design prevention and control measures targeted at the
disease, mapping of endemic areas and risk assessment for CCHF in
Europe should be completed. Furthermore, areas at risk for further
CCHF expansion should be identified and human, vector and animal
surveillance be strengthened.

Introduction:

CCHF is an acute, highly-contagious viral zoonosis transmitted to
humans mainly by ticks of the genus _Hyalomma_, but also through
direct contact with blood or tissues of viraemic hosts. In humans
CCHF typically presents with high fever of sudden onset, malaise,
severe headache and gastrointestinal symptoms. Prominent hemorrhages
may occur in late stages of the disease with published fatality rates
ranging from 10 percent to 50 percent [1,2]. The disease is endemic
in parts of Africa, Asia, the Middle East and eastern Europe. Main
animal hosts include a number of domestic animals such as cattle,
sheep, goats, and hares. CCHF [virus] has the potential to cause
community and nosocomial outbreaks. Due to the high case fatality
rates and difficulties in treatment, prevention, and control, CCHF is
a disease which should be notified immediately to public health
authorities in the European Union (EU). CCHF virus is also in the
list of agents for which the Revised International Health Regulations
of 2005 call for implementation of the decision algorithm for risk
assessment and possible notification to the World Health Organization
(WHO) [3].

In Europe, CCHF is currently only endemic in Bulgaria, however during
the last decade an increased number of CCHF cases and outbreaks have
been recorded in other countries in the region such as Albania,
Kosovo, Turkey, and the Ukraine as well as south-western regions of
the Russian Federation [4-9]. In June 2008, the 1st case was
registered in Greece [10]. In response to this situation, the
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) invited a
group of CCHF experts to review the situation of CCHF in Europe and
to consult on interventions necessary to strengthen preparedness and
response at the European level [11]. This article provides an update
on the current situation of CCHF in Europe and emphasises existing
prevention and control capacities within the EU. Aspects relevant to
strengthen preparedness for CCHF are also discussed.

CCHF situation in Europe:

CCHF is endemic in Bulgaria since the 1950s, when a large outbreak
occurred from 1954 to 1955 with 487 notified cases mainly in the
Shumen area in north-east Bulgaria. In total, 1568 CCHF cases were
notified in Bulgaria from 1953 to 2008, with an overall case fatality
rate of 17 percent [4]. Endemic areas are confined to the vicinity of
Shumen, Razgrad, Veliko Tarnovo, Plovdiv, Pazardjik, Haskovo,
Kardjali, and Bourgas; however in April 2008 a cluster of 6 probable
cases occurred in Gotse Delchev in the south-western province
Blagoevgrad near the border with Greece, an area considered of low
CCHF endemicity until recently [5]. During the last decade, CCHF
outbreaks have also been noted in Albania in 2001 and 2003, and in
Kosovo in 2001 [6,7].

In Turkey, the 1st symptomatic human CCHF cases were noted in 2002;
however, serologic evidence of enzootic CCHF virus circulation as
well as limited evidence of CCHF infections among humans (2.4 percent
among 1100 tested humans) has been found since the 1970's [4].
Starting in 2003, Turkey has experienced an expanding outbreak with
increasing numbers of notified cases and associated fatalities (2002:
17/0; 2003: 133/6; 2004: 249/13; 2005: 266/13; 2006: 438/27; 2007:
713/33; 2008: 1315/63; 2009: 1300/62) [4,12]. Overall, there are more
than 4400 recorded laboratory confirmed CCHF cases in this country,
mainly among residents in rural areas in north-central and north-east
Anatolia [4,8,12]. Within the CCHF endemic areas, there are
hyperendemic areas where one out of every 5 residents and one out of
every 2 residents with a history of tick bite has antibodies against
CCHF virus [13]. A predictive map model using satellite-based climate
data and high-resolution vegetation images from Turkey from 2003 to
2006 revealed that areas with higher CCHF reporting were
significantly associated with zones of high climate suitability for
_Hyalomma_ ticks and high rate of fragmentation of agricultural land
[13].

In Greece, a serosurvey conducted between 1981 and 1988 among 3388
rural residents from across the country showed one percent
seroprevalence rate against CCHF virus [4]. More than 400 cases with
a CCHF compatible clinical syndrome have tested negative for CCHF
virus in this country since 1982, therefore, the seroprevalence rate
of one percent was attributed to the non-pathogenic AP-92 strain and
not to the pathogenic Balkan CCHF virus strain. A number of the cases
tested for CCHF were finally diagnosed as hemorrhagic fever with
renal syndrome (HFRS), leptospirosis and ricketsial infections. Other
diagnoses were meningococcal meningitis and unspecified bacterial
sepsis. The 1st CCHF case was recorded in June 2008 in a woman with a
tick bite working in agriculture near the city of Komotini in
north-eastern Greece [10]. This town is situated within a few
kilometres distance from there, where the Bulgarian cluster occurred
in 2008 [5]. A seroepidemiological study for CCHF virus among local
population and animals are underway in northern Greece.

After nearly 27 years without any human cases, CCHF re-emerged in the
south-western regions of the Russian Federation in 1999. Outbreaks
have been reported in Astrakhan, Rostov and Volgograd Provinces,
Krasnodar and Stavropol Territories, Kalmykia, Dagestan and
Ingushetia Republics. Between 2000 and 2009 more than 1300 clinical
cases were diagnosed in the Russian Federation with an overall
fatality rate of 3.2 percent for the period from 2002-2007 [4]. Most
cases occurred among residents of rural areas in the Southern Federal
Distinct. The largest number of cases was registered in Stavropol
Territory, Kalmykia Republic and Rostov Province, where the mean
annual CCHF incidence rate was 1.7, 10.1, and 0.7 cases per 100 000
population, respectively. During 2008 alone, the incidence in
Stavropol Territory increased by 1.3 times, and was the highest
recorded in this region during the last decade [4,9,14]. In 2009,
CCHF cases were also reported from Georgia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan,
Iran, and Pakistan [15].

CCHF emergence and/or re-emergence in south-eastern Europe and
neighboring countries is attributed to climate and ecologic changes
and anthropogenic factors such as changes in land use, agricultural
practices, hunting activities, and movement of livestock, that may
have an impact on ticks and hosts and accordingly on CCHF
epidemiology [1,2]. The geographic distribution of CCHF coincides
with that of _Hyalomma_ ticks. _H. marginatum_, the main CCHF virus
vector in Europe, is found in Albania, Bulgaria, Cyprus, France,
Greece, Italy, Kosovo, Moldavia, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia,
Spain, Turkey, and the Ukraine. In 2006 it was detected for the 1st
time in the Netherlands and in southern Germany [16,17]. Given the
wide distribution of its vector, the numerous animals that can serve
as hosts, and the favorable climate and ecologic conditions in
several European countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea, it is
possible that the occurrence of CCHF will expand in the future. A
model that studied various climate scenarios on the habitat areas of
different ticks, showed that a rise in temperature and a decrease in
rainfall in the Mediterranean region will result in a sharp increase
in the suitable habitat areas for _H. marginatum_ and its expansion
towards the north, with the highest impact noted at the margins of
its current geographic range [18].

Current prevention and control in Europe:

Several elements relating to laboratory diagnosis, surveillance and
therapy of CCHF should be addressed in order to increase preparedness
capacity in Europe and to design appropriate prevention and control
measures.

Laboratory diagnosis -- In 2008 there were 20 laboratories with
diagnostic capacities for CCHF virus in Europe: 14 in EU Member
States, 8 in the endemic regions of the Russian Federation, and one
in Turkey. Most of them used immunofluorescence assays (IFA), ELISA,
and/or molecular methods to diagnose CCHF whereas 8 among them were
also able to isolate CCHF virus [11], a BSL-4 containment agent.

Surveillance -- Currently, there are no standardised case definitions
for CCHF notification and contact tracing within European countries
[19]. Recent cases of nosocomial acquisition of CCHF in health care
workers were well documented [6,8,20]. These cases underline the need
for educating health-care workers about the modes of getting infected
with CCHF virus and for strict implementation of infection control
measures within health-care facilities, and the importance of
providing adequate resources to do so [1,2].

Therapy -- The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends ribavirin
for the treatment of CCHF cases [21,22]. Ribavirin appears to be more
effective when introduced early in the course of illness [23].
Evidence of its efficacy is based on in vitro data and on limited
observations in humans [24-26]. Randomised controlled trials have not
been conducted so far, and ethical issues concerning the use of a
control group remain a major obstacle for this [27]. Severity of
infection, duration of illness prior to initiation of therapy, and
route of administration may impact the clinical outcome of CCHF
cases. On individual country level, recommendations for treatment of
CCHF cases with ribavirin existed in 2008 in Turkey, Russia,
Bulgaria, and Greece. In Bulgaria, in addition, specific hyperimmune
globulin collected from convalescent CCHF cases is used for
prophylaxis and treatment and an inactivated suckling mouse brain
vaccine is in use since the 1970s for high-risk groups living in CCHF
endemic regions [28]. There is no vaccine against CCHF licensed in
any other EU Member State.

Conclusions:

CCHF is a disease with a high fatality rate and the potential to
cause outbreaks. The vector for CCHF, the _Hyalomma tick is present
in southeastern and southern Europe. Climate factors may contribute
to a further spread of the vector and to a consecutive extension of
the geographic range of CCHF, which may further expand to European
countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea, with the highest risk in
neighbouring areas with already established endemicity. This
highlights the need for strengthening human, vector, and veterinary
surveillance, especially in areas where CCHF is expected to occur in
the future. Together with the implementation of standardised case
definitions for CCHF this will allow an estimate of the CCHF burden
and of epidemiologic trends in various areas and countries. Guidance
for contact tracing and the establishment of early detection and
response systems will allow prompt interventions at patient,
community, and hospital level. Considering the high case fatality
rate of CCHF, ribavirin efficacy should be assessed through
well-designed clinical protocols and in endemic areas general public
and health-care workers should be aware about modes of CCHF
transmission and prophylactic measures. Climate and environmental
factors and human behavior that may influence CCHF epidemiology and
spread should be further studied. Mapping of endemic areas and risk
assessment for CCHF in Europe should be completed and areas at risk
for CCHF expansion should be identified and finally, appropriate
tick-control strategies including public education should be
implemented. All these measures should be undertaken as part of a
multidisciplinary collaboration at interregional and international
level and link ARBO-ZOONET [29]. In accordance with an ECDC-initiated
assessment on the importance of vector-borne diseases in 2008, CCHF
has been identified as a priority disease for the EU [12].

References:

[Interested readers should refer to the original text for details of
the 29 literature references accompanying this article.]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org


[This excellent survey documents the recent expansion of CCHF in
Europe and its apparent resurgence in its original Crimean home. The
situation in Greece together with studies of seroprevalence and
tick-bite analysis in Turkey suggest that strains of CCHF virus of
differing pathogenicity for humans may be circulating in the European
region.

Climatic change in the form of a rise in temperature and a decrease
in rainfall in the Mediterranean region and beyond may provide
additional suitable habitats for the _Hyalomma marginatum_ vector of
CCHF and facilitate an expansion towards the north, with greatest
impact at the margins of its current geographic range.

Images of _Hyalomma marginatum_ ticks can be viewed at:
<http://webpages.lincoln.ac.uk/fruedisueli/FR-webpages/parasitology/Ticks/TIK/tick-key/hyalomma_adult.htm>.

The HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Europe can be accessed
at: <http://healthmap.org/r/019->. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2008
----
Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Greece (05): (NE) 20080823.2631
Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Greece (04): (NE), susp. 20080709.2090
Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Greece (03): (NE) 20080706.2048
Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Greece (02): (NE) 20080705.2042
Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Greece (NE) 20080703.2033
...................................................cp/msp/lm

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at:
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Donations.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
