<header id=051351>
Published Date: 2009-12-05 18:00:07 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (123): vaccine safety
Archive Number: 20091205.4152
</header>
<body id=051351>
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC (H1N1) 2009 (123): VACCINE SAFETY
****************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Fri 4 Dec 2009
Source: MMWR Weekly, 2009 / 58(Early Release);1-6 [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm58e1204a1.htm>


Safety of Influenza A (H1N1) 2009 Monovalent Vaccines -- United
States, 1 Oct to 24 Nov 2009
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) licensed the 1st 2009 influenza
A (H1N1) monovalent vaccines ("H1N1 vaccines") on 15 Sep 2009 (1). The
H1N1 vaccines are available as a live, attenuated monovalent vaccine
(LAMV) for intranasal administration and as monovalent, inactivated,
split-virus or subunit vaccines for injection (MIV). The licensure and
manufacturing processes for the monovalent H1N1 vaccines were the same
as those used for seasonal trivalent inactivated (TIV) or trivalent
live, attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV); none of these vaccines
contains an adjuvant (1).

Vaccine safety monitoring is an important component of all vaccination
programs. To assess the safety profile of H1N1 vaccines in the United
States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reviewed
vaccine safety results for the H1N1 vaccines from 3783 reports
received through the U.S. Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
(VAERS) and electronic data from 438 376 persons vaccinated in
managed-care organizations in the Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD), a
large, population-based database with administrative and diagnostic
data, in the 1st 2 months of reporting (as of 24 Nov 2009).

VAERS data indicated 82 adverse event reports per 1 million H1N1
vaccine doses distributed, compared with 47 reports per 1 million
seasonal influenza vaccine doses distributed. However, no substantial
differences between H1N1 and seasonal influenza vaccines were noted in
the proportion or types of serious adverse events reported. No
increase in any adverse events under surveillance has been seen in VSD
data. Many agencies are using multiple systems to monitor H1N1 vaccine
safety (2). Health-care providers and the public are encouraged to
report adverse health events that occur after vaccination.

Reports to VAERS
----------------
Health-care providers and manufacturers are required to report to
VAERS certain adverse events in vaccinees brought to their attention
after vaccination with licensed U.S. vaccines;* however, health-care
providers and members of the public also may report other adverse
events voluntarily. VAERS enables early detection of potential new,
rare, or unusual patterns of adverse events, which then can be
investigated using other methods and systems to determine whether an
actual association with vaccination exists (3).

*Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 600.80. Postmarketing
reporting of adverse experiences. Federal Register 1997;62:52252--3.
National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 (42 USC 300aa-25).

With the initiation of the federal H1N1 vaccination program, VAERS was
enhanced by providing VAERS contact information on influenza
vaccination record cards, advertising in medical journals, utilizing
state vaccine safety coordinators, and increasing the number of staff
members who code reports and obtain and review medical records; these
changes were made to encourage VAERS reporting and to increase the
capacity to analyze additional reports to rapidly identify any safety
signals.

The CDC and FDA staff members searched the VAERS database to identify
all U.S. reports of adverse events after vaccination with H1N1
vaccines and 2009--10 seasonal influenza vaccines during 1 Jul to 24
Nov 2009. The 1st doses of H1N1 LAMV became available to the public in
the United States on 5 Oct 2009, and H1N1 MIV became available the
following week. VAERS reports were coded as fatal or nonfatal serious
adverse events (defined by federal regulation as those resulting in
death, life-threatening illness, hospitalization, prolongation of
hospitalization, persistent or significant disability, or congenital
anomaly) or as nonserious, (Nonserious events are defined as all
others not categorized as serious adverse events) and reporting rates
per 1 million doses distributed as of 20 nov 2009 were calculated.

VAERS reports coded as serious adverse events are reviewed by medical
officers and assigned to predetermined broad diagnostic categories. To
verify the reported event, medical records are requested and reviewed
for all serious adverse event reports and for any reports (both
serious and nonserious) that describe patients with possible
Guillain-Barre syndrome or anaphylaxis. Cause of death is determined
as stated in medical or autopsy records. Reports to VAERS indicate
only that health events occurred after vaccination; causality
generally cannot be determined solely by reports to VAERS. Excluded
were 62 reports with insufficient information.

Through 24 Nov 2009, VAERS received 3783 reports of adverse events
after receipt of H1N1 vaccine, of which 204 were categorized as
serious, and 4672 reports after receipt of seasonal influenza
vaccines, of which 283 were serious. During 5 Oct to 20 Nov 2009, a
total of 46.2 million doses of H1N1 vaccines (11.3 million LAMV and
34.9 million MIV doses) and 98.9 million doses of seasonal influenza
vaccines were distributed to U.S states and territories. The overall
VAERS adverse event reporting rates were 82 per 1 million H1N1 vaccine
doses distributed and 47 per 1 million seasonal influenza vaccine
doses distributed. The serious adverse event reporting rates were 4.4
and 2.9 serious adverse events per 1 million doses distributed for
H1N1 vaccines and seasonal influenza vaccines, respectively.

However, the percentage of serious adverse events among all adverse
events reported after receipt of seasonal influenza vaccines was
slightly higher (6.1 percent), compared with the percentage of serious
adverse events after receipt of H1N1 vaccines (5.4 percent), and this
finding was consistent for inactivated (5.8 percent versus 5.5
percent) and live attenuated (7.3 percent versus 4.7 percent)
vaccines. (These data are presented in tabulated form in the original
text)).

VAERS received 13 reports of deaths occurring after receipt of H1N1
vaccine; 3 deaths occurred after receipt of LAMV and 10 after receipt
of MIV. In 9 of these deaths, significant underlying illness
(including illness that might be indication for vaccination) was
present; one death resulted from a motor vehicle crash, and the
remaining 3 deaths await review of final autopsy results or death
certificates by the CDC.

As of 24 Nov 2009, VAERS had received 10 reports of Guillain-Barre
syndrome, and 2 additional reports of possible Guillain-Barre syndrome
were identified by medical officers reviewing other reports to VAERS
describing neurologic events. After chart review, 4 of these 12
reports (all after receipt of MIV) met Brighton Collaboration criteria
for Guillain-Barre syndrome; 4 did not meet the criteria; and 4 are
under review. VAERS also received 11 reports of anaphylaxis, and an
additional 8 reports of possible anaphylaxis were identified by
medical officers reviewing reports to VAERS of serious allergic
events. Of these 19 cases, 13 met Brighton Collaboration criteria,
five had an anaphylaxis diagnosis on medical record review, and one
has not been confirmed. Three of the Guillain- Barre syndrome cases
and 15 of the anaphylaxis cases were coded as serious adverse events,
in accordance with federal regulation.

The remaining 173 nonfatal serious adverse events after vaccination
with H1N1 vaccines are under chart review. These reports fall into the
following diagnostic categories: neurologic or muscular condition
other than Guillain-Barre syndrome (49 [28 percent]); pneumonia or
influenza-like illness (27 [16 percent]); other noninfectious
conditions, including multiple medical symptoms (19 [11 percent]);
respiratory or ear, nose, and throat condition (17 [10 percent]);
allergic conditions other than anaphylaxis (16 [9 percent]); pregnancy
complications (15 [9 percent]); other infectious symptoms (10 [6
percent]); gastrointestinal (8 [5 percent]); cardiovascular (8 [3
percent]); and psychiatric (8 [3 percent]). Each category includes a
variety of diagnoses; no patterns were identified.

VSD Data
--------
VSD is a collaboration between CDC and 8 managed-care organizations
with a total of 9.5 million members, which utilizes administrative
data and electronic medical records to collect information on
vaccinations and health-care encounters to monitor vaccine safety. VSD
is monitoring H1N1 vaccine safety using historical and other
appropriate comparison groups, with weekly data analyses (4). As of 21
Nov 2009, 438 376 doses of H1N1 vaccines (323 345 MIV and 115 031
LAMV) had been administered to patients under VSD surveillance. During
1 Oct to 21 Nov 20091, no cases of Guillain-Barre syndrome and one
case of anaphylaxis were observed among vaccinated persons in VSD. In
addition, VSD has detected no increase in rates for other monitored
conditions: demyelinating disease, peripheral nervous system disease,
seizure, encephalomyelitis, Bell's palsy, other cranial nerve
disorders, ataxia, allergic reactions, and myocarditis. VSD will
continue H1N1 vaccine safety monitoring throughout t!
he vaccination campaign.

(Reported by: State and local health departments. K Broder, MD, C
Vellozzi, MD, CDC Influenza Vaccine Safety Response Team, National
Center for Preparedness, Detection, and Control of Infectious
Diseases; C Weinbaum, MD, Emergency Operations Center Vaccine Task
Force; Y Zheteyeva, MD, P Tosh, MD, A Rao, MD, S Hocevar, MD, D
Esposito, MD, EIS officers, CDC.)

MMWR Editorial Note:
--------------------
Seasonal influenza vaccines consistently have had excellent safety
profiles, as documented in recent multiyear studies (5). However, in
1976, a vaccine against a swine-origin influenza virus was associated
with a small, but statistically significant, increased risk for
Guillain-Barre syndrome among adult vaccinees in the 8 weeks after
vaccination (attributable risk: 1 per 100 000 vaccinees). The reasons
for this association remain unknown. Vaccine production has changed
since 1976, with increased use of vaccines which are treated with
solvents to produce split-virus vaccines, or with detergents to
produce subunit vaccines, resulting in fewer adverse reactions.
However, the historical association with the swine-origin influenza
virus of 1976, high public expectations for the H1N1 vaccine program,
and the federal commitment to ensure vaccine safety all have
contributed to efforts to enhance vaccine safety monitoring systems
for H1N1 vaccines.

In clinical trials of the 4 H1N1 vaccine products licensed in the
United States in September 2009, most adverse events were mild and
similar to those described after receipt of seasonal influenza
vaccines (Sanofi Pasteur, Inc.; Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics,
Inc; CSL Limited; and MedImmune LLC; unpublished data, 2009) (5,6).
However, these clinical trials were limited in size and not designed
to detect rare adverse events after vaccination. Moreover, they
generally included only healthy volunteers. Additional vaccine trials
of the H1N1 vaccines are being conducted by the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in approximately 4000 persons
aged 6 months to >65 years, including approximately 200 pregnant
women. To date, no serious adverse events associated with receipt of
these vaccines have been identified by independent safety monitoring
committees (C. Heilman, personal communication, NIAID, 2009).

Data from VAERS indicated that the overall reporting rate after H1N1
vaccination was higher than the rate after seasonal influenza
vaccination. Although these data might represent an actual difference
in the safety of the vaccines, the difference might have resulted from
efforts to enhance reporting to VAERS and heightened public awareness
of the H1N1 vaccines. VSD has the capability to test and strengthen
hypotheses generated by VAERS reports. To date, preliminary VSD data
indicate no increase above background rates for monitored health
events among recipients of H1N1 vaccines. VSD, because of its ability
to follow populations of vaccinated and unvaccinated persons over
time, can detect associations between health events and vaccination.
This and other systems will continue to monitor adverse events after
H1N1 and seasonal influenza vaccination and can help determine whether
adverse events after vaccination are causally related to the vaccines.

The findings in this report are subject to at least 3 limitations.
First, as a voluntary reporting system VAERS is subject to
underreporting, and the use of the number of vaccine doses distributed
as the denominator for calculating adverse event reporting rates also
contributes to lower rates than would have been calculated using the
number of doses administered. However, distribution data are the best
available for rapid calculations and have been used previously for
vaccine safety assessments (3,5). Second, VAERS reports provide only
preliminary diagnoses; these diagnoses are validated later with
medical record reviews. Even when diagnoses are validated, VAERS
reports do not enable conclusions to be drawn regarding associations
between vaccination and the adverse events reported. In addition,
medical conditions that might develop months after vaccination could
not be captured in this VAERS analysis, which included only 2 months
of postvaccination experience.

Finally, for the VSD analysis, the number of H1N1 vaccine doses
administered within the managed-care organizations had not yet reached
an adequate level to detect small increases in risk for rare diseases.
For example, 400 000 doses administered would enable detection of an
increased risk for Guillain- Barre syndrome as large as the 7-fold
increase observed after the 1976 vaccinations; however, 800 000 doses
would be needed to detect only a 2-fold increase.

The 13 deaths reported to VAERS reflect a range of underlying
conditions, some of which cannot be reasonably attributed to
vaccination. No patterns in age, sex, or type of underlying medical
condition were observed that might lead investigators to suspect a
causal link with vaccination. Regarding Guillain-Barre syndrome cases
reported after H1N1 vaccination, the currently reported number of
cases appears substantially smaller than the number expected from a
population of 30--40 million persons, but underreporting to VAERS and
differences in vaccinated and background populations make the
comparison complex.

Guillain-Barre syndrome monitoring and evaluation are continuing using
VAERS, VSD, and enhanced Guillain-Barre syndrome surveillance systems.
In 15 years of VAERS experience with TIV, 28 percent of severe adverse
event reports were classified as neurologic or muscular conditions, 11
percent as respiratory, and 6 percent as gastrointestinal (5),
percentages comparable with those observed (28 percent, 10 percent,
and 5 percent) in these initial reports after H1N1 vaccination.

A comprehensive vaccine safety monitoring and response program is
necessary to detect possible increases in adverse health events and
formulate hypotheses for further investigation and testing. VAERS data
can detect safety signals (i.e., new, unexpected or rare adverse
events) but generally cannot be used to infer causality (3). Once a
large enough number of vaccine doses have been administered in its
member managed care organizations, VSD can better identify
associations between vaccination and health events (4).

Recently, new vaccine safety monitoring systems have been developed to
augment existing surveillance systems by focusing on specific health
events (e.g., Guillain-Barre syndrome or pregnancy outcomes) and to
estimate background rates for selected medical conditions, conduct
case-control studies, and assess causality. These additional systems
will enhance the ability to determine whether the difference in the
VAERS reporting rate between H1N1 and seasonal influenza vaccines can
be attributed to reporting bias or safety differences. To synthesize
and evaluate data on H1N1 vaccine safety, a nongovernment working
group has been established by the National Vaccine Advisory Committee
with members representing other federal advisory committees as well as
experts in internal medicine, pediatrics, immunology, and vaccine
safety. The group will meet every 2 weeks and will provide reports to
the public through the National Vaccine Advisory Committee after
considering data from the many a!
vailable systems.

References:
-----------
(1) Food and Drug Administration. Influenza A (H1N1) 2009 monovalent.
Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and
Drug Administration. Available at
<http://www.fda.gov/biologicsbloodvaccines/vaccines/approvedproducts/ucm181950.htm>. Accessed 25 Nov
2009.
(2) US Department of Health and Human Services. Federal plans to
monitor immunization safety for the pandemic H1N1 influenza
vaccination program. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human
Services; 2009. Available at
<http://www.flu.gov/professional/federal/monitor_immunization_safety.html#intro>. Accessed 25 Nov
2009.
(3) Varricchio F, Iskander J, Destefano F, et al. Understanding
vaccine safety information from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting
System. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004;23:287--94.
(4) Lieu TA, Kulldorff M, Davis RL, et al; for the Vaccine Safety
Datalink Rapid Cycle Analysis Team. Real-time vaccine safety
surveillance for the early detection of adverse events. Med Care
2007;45(10 Supl 2):S89--95.
(5) Vellozzi C, Burwen DR, Dobardzic A, Ball R, Walton K, Haber P.
Safety of trivalent inactivated influenza vaccines in adults:
background for pandemic influenza vaccine safety monitoring. Vaccine
2009;27:2114--20.
(6) Greenberg ME, Lai MH, Hartel GF, et al. Response after one dose of
a monovalent influenza A (H1N1) 2009 vaccine---preliminary report. N
Engl J Med 2009;361.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[These initial estimates of the safety of pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus
vaccines (both live modified and inactivated vaccine) are reassuming
in that no substantial differences between pandemic H1N1 and seasonal
influenza vaccines were noted in terms of the proportion or types of
serious adverse events observed. Nonetheless health-care providers and
the public are encouraged to report adverse health events that occur
after vaccination.

The overall reporting rate for adverse events after pandemic H1N1
vaccination was slightly higher than the rate after seasonal influenza
vaccination, but there are reasons to discount this difference until
more extensive data becomes available. However, use of the number of
vaccine doses distributed as the denominator for calculating adverse
event may have produced lower rates than would have been obtained
using the number of doses actually administered. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (122): Canada, China, France, WHO
20091204.4138
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (121): CDC Alert 20091203.4123
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (120): Canada, Haiti, Italy, USA 20091203.4127
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (110): UK (Wales), Tamiflu resistance
20091120.4000
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (100): Ukraine (DT) 20091114.3940
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (90): Venezuela, Yanomami 20091105.3820
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (80): Ukraine susp. RFI 20091031.3764
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (70): Nepal 20091016.3563
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (60): bacterial coinfection 20090930.3410
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (50): oseltamivir-resistance 20090917.3260
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (40): global update 20090906.3138
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (30): assumptions 20090813.2879
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (20): Peru, 33 percent asymptomatic
20090730.2668
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (10): vaccine 20090720.2577
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 - Viet Nam: patient data 20090708.2450
................................cp/ejp/jw
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
