<header id=029166>
Published Date: 2009-06-25 14:00:07 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Measles elimination - Western Pacific Region: update 2008
Archive Number: 20090625.2317
</header>
<body id=029166>
MEASLES ELIMINATION - WESTERN PACIFIC REGION: UPDATE 2008
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Thu 25 Jun 2009
Source: MMWR Weekly, 26 Jun 2009 / 58(24);669-673 [abbreviated and edited]


Progress Toward the 2012 Measles Elimination Goal - Western Pacific
Region, 1990-2008
-------------------------------------------
In 2003, the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Committee of
the Western Pacific Region (WPR) formally declared a measles
elimination goal (1), and in 2005, the committee established a target
date of 2012 for regional measles elimination (2). Key strategies
recommended by WHO for achievement of measles elimination include 1)
very high (greater than or equal to 95 percent) vaccination coverage
with 2 doses of measles-containing vaccine (MCV1 and MCV2) through
routine vaccination and/or supplemental immunization activities
(SIAs); 2) high-quality case-based measles surveillance; and 3)
access to an accredited measles laboratory network for testing of
suspected measles cases and identification of measles virus
genotypes. This report describes progress toward measles elimination
in the WPR through 2008.

Measles likely has been eliminated or nearly eliminated in 24 of the
37 countries and areas in the WPR (referred to in this report as
countries). However, large numbers of measles cases continue to be
reported from several countries. During 2008, a total of 131 441
confirmed measles cases (98.4 per million population) were reported
from China and 11 015 cases (86.1 per million population) from Japan,
2 countries that account for 82 percent of the region's population
and greater than 97 percent of its confirmed measles cases.
Intensified efforts by WPR countries, particularly China and Japan,
will be required to achieve the 2012 goal.

Routine Vaccination

Among the 37 countries in the WPR, 36 report administrative and, if
available, survey data and their estimates of vaccination coverage
among infants annually to WHO and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF). The other country, Pitcairn Islands (with a population of
approximately 50 persons), does not report data to WHO/UNICEF and is
not included in this report. Based on these and other data available
from published literature, WHO/UNICEF make their estimates of actual
vaccination coverage for WHO member states (3). Regional MCV1
coverage by year was determined using WHO/UNICEF estimates of
vaccination coverage and, when these estimates were not available
(such as in certain areas of member states), coverage was determined
using country estimates and weighting by country population size.
Because China includes 75 percent of the region's population, its
data are reported separately.

The history of measles elimination in the WPR can be divided into 3
periods: the period of measles control (1990--1995), the period of
accelerated measles control (1996--2002), and the period of measles
elimination (from 2003 to the present). This report uses these 3
periods to describe progress toward measles elimination. Among the 35
WPR countries reporting (i.e., all WPR countries except China and
Pitcairn Islands), mean regional MCV1 coverage was 80.8 percent
during the period of measles control (1990--1995), increased to 89.0
percent during the period of accelerated control (1996--2002), and
reached 91.6 percent during the period of measles elimination
(2003--2008). The WHO-estimated mean MCV1 coverage in China was 85.5
percent, 84.4 percent, and 88.8 percent during the same periods, but
increased from 85 percent in 2003 to 94 percent in 2007 (data were
not available for 2008). Among 36 countries (including China)
reporting dose schedules in 2008, MCV1 was scheduled for a!
dministration at age less than 9 months in 2 (5.6 percent) countries,
age 9 months in 5 (13.9 percent) countries, age 12 months in 26 (72.2
percent) countries, and age 15 months in 3 (8.3 percent) countries.

Before 2003, few countries reported MCV2 coverage to WHO/UNICEF.
During 2003--2008 (the period of measles elimination), the number of
reporting countries varied annually from 16 to 24. These country
estimates were used to determine the regional weighted MCV2 coverage
by year. Mean MCV2 coverage (excluding China) during 2003--2008 was
84.2 percent. China's reported MCV2 coverage ranged from 84.1 percent
to 96.4 percent during 2003--2007, with a mean of 92.5 percent. As of
2008, among the 30 countries that had scheduled administration of
MCV2, 12 countries (40 percent) administered MCV2 at age 13--23
months, 3 (10 percent) at age 2 years, 8 (26.7 percent) at age 4
years, one (3.3 percent) at age 5 years, 5 (16.7 percent) at age 6
years, and one (3.3 percent) at age 7 years.

Supplemental Immunization Activities

During the periods of measles accelerated control (1996--2002) and
elimination (2003--2008), many countries conducted SIAs.
Approximately 94.4 million children and adolescents in 28 WPR
countries (excluding China) were vaccinated through SIAs. In China,
SIAs during 2003--2008 reached approximately 101 million children and
adolescents in 14 provinces (Table 2). SIA coverage generally has
been higher since the region established an elimination goal.
Excluding China, SIAs reached 87 percent of the target population in
25 countries during the period of measles accelerated control
(1996--2002) and increased to 94 percent of the target population in
28 countries during the period of measles elimination (2003--2008).
In China, SIA coverage by year during 2003--2008 was 95 percent--99
percent, with the exception of 2005. SIAs in the WPR were frequently
used to provide vitamin A, oral polio vaccine, and anti-helminthics
in addition to MCV.

Surveillance Activities

By 2008, all countries in WPR conducted case-based measles
surveillance, supported by the measles and rubella laboratory network
(LabNet), a network of 382 laboratories. Standard indicators for
high-quality measles surveillance include 1) 2 or more suspected
measles cases per 100 000 discarded as nonmeasles; 2) greater than or
equal to 80 percent of suspected measles cases with adequate
investigations (i.e., investigations within 48 hours of rash onset
that include all essential data elements); 3) greater than or equal
to 80 percent of suspected measles cases with clinical specimens
collected within 28 days of rash onset; and 4) greater than or equal
to 80 percent of specimens with laboratory results available within 7
days after receipt in the laboratory (4,5). In 2008, the region's
indicator achievements were 1.6, 47 percent, 62 percent, and 76
percent, respectively (6).

Genotypes of endemic measles virus identified among measles patients
in the WPR since 2007 include D5 in Japan, D9 in Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, and New Zealand, and H1 in China, Hong
Kong (China, Special Administrative Region [SAR]), and Viet Nam. In
addition, genotypes B3, D4, D8, and G3 were identified among measles
patients; some of these genotypes were imported from other regions.

Monitoring Measles Incidence

Suspected measles cases can be confirmed by the laboratory (e.g.,
presence of anti-measles immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies in
clinical specimens), by epidemiologic linkage to another confirmed
case, and by clinical criteria (i.e., cases that satisfy the measles
clinical case definition and cannot be discarded as nonmeasles by
laboratory or other criteria). Since 1990, the largest annual number
of measles cases reported from the WPR (excluding China) was 106 172
(255.6 per million population) in 2000. In 2008, excluding China, 14
724 cases (32.6 per million) were reported, a decrease of 86 percent.
China reported 131 441 measles cases (98.4 per million) in 2008. A
large outbreak in Japan resulted in over 18 000 (140.7 per million)
reported cases in 2007 and 11 015 (86.1 per million) in 2008 (7).
Excluding China and Japan, 3564 measles cases (11.8 per million) were
reported from the rest of the region in 2008. In descending order,
the majority of these were from Cambodia (1765!
), Philippines (880), Malaysia (333), Viet Nam (258), and Lao
People's Democratic Republic (117) (6).

Country Measles Elimination Status

Several WPR countries have achieved or nearly achieved the indicator
targets suggesting substantial progress toward measles elimination.
In 2006, Republic of Korea declared measles eliminated after having
successfully implemented WHO-recommended strategies (8). In
Australia, measles incidence has ranged from 0.5 to 6.1 per million
since 2002; case investigations and genotype analysis indicated that
the majority of these cases were imported or import-related (9).
Reported routine vaccination coverage in Australia is high; however,
sensitivity of suspected measles reporting is uncertain because
surveillance performance is not monitored nationally. In Macau
(China, SAR), fewer than 5 cases per year have been reported since
2001, corresponding to an annual incidence of zero to 8.3 per
million; case investigations and genotype analysis of specimens
during this period indicate that most of these cases were imported.
In 2008, surveillance performance in Macau (China, SAR) satisfied a!
ll key indicator targets. All 21 Pacific island countries have
reported zero measles cases in 2007 and 2008.

MMWR Editorial Note:

The WPR has made progress toward the 2012 regional goal of measles
elimination as evidenced by increasing routine and SIA measles
vaccination coverage and declining measles incidence in the presence
of improving case-based, laboratory-supported measles surveillance
systems. Nevertheless, in the region overall and in many countries,
surveillance does not yet meet elimination standards, leading to
under reporting or misclassification of cases. Moreover, countries
such as Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Papua New Guinea,
and others face challenges to achieving the 2012 goal because of
general weaknesses of public health services that result in low
routine vaccination coverage. In such countries, continuing periodic
SIAs to attain high MCV coverage while working to strengthen routine
vaccination systems will be critical to achieve the goal. Ensuring
that all suspected measles cases are identified, reported and fully
investigated by providing training, adequate operatio!
nal costs, and laboratory support is urgently needed to monitor
progress toward and ultimately validate achievement of measles
elimination. Monitoring of circulating measles genotypes also is
needed to validate interruption of endemic measles virus transmission.

Challenges also exist in China and Japan, which together accounted
for 82 percent of the region's population and more than 97 percent of
its reported measles cases in 2008. Both countries have made renewed
commitments and plans for achieving the 2012 regional goal. China has
strengthened routine measles vaccination by scheduling earlier
administration of MCV2 (at age 18--24 months instead of 7 years),
providing incentives to health-care workers for immunizing children,
and requiring proof of receiving 2 doses of measles vaccine at school
entry. Japan is implementing a national measles elimination plan
established in December 2007 (7).

Efforts to eliminate measles help strengthen health systems and
reduce child mortality from pneumonia, diarrhea, and micronutrient
deficiencies that occur after measles infection, thereby helping to
achieve the United Nations' Millennium Development Goal No. 4 (to
reduce by 2/3rds, from 1990 to 2015, the mortality rate in children
aged less than 5 years). To achieve measles elimination and
Millennium Development Goal No. 4, intensified and innovative efforts
will be required by WPR countries and measles elimination partners to
implement recommended strategies and target potentially new high-risk
groups (e.g., young adults) revealed by epidemiologic analysis of
surveillance data.

References

(1) World Health Organization. Fifty-fourth session of the Regional
Committee for the Western Pacific. Summary record of the fifth
meeting. Resolution WPR/RC54.R3. Expanded programme on immunization:
measles and hepatitis B. Manila, Philippines: World Health
Organization; 2003. Available at
<http://www.wpro.who.int/rcm/en/archives/rc54/rc_resolutions/wpr_rc54_r03.htm>.
(2) World Health Organization. Fifty-sixth session of the Regional
Committee for the Western Pacific. Summary record of the eighth
meeting. Resolution WPR/RC56.R8. Measles elimination, hepatitis B
control, and poliomyelitis eradication. Manila, Philippines: World
Health Organization; 2005. Available at
<http://www.wpro.who.int/nr/rdonlyres/185af547-3c1a-4510-96f2-94d4402355e9/0/rc56_r08.pdf>.
(3) World Health Organization. WHO-UNICEF estimates of MCV coverage.
Available at
<http://www.who.int/immunization_monitoring/en/globalsummary/timeseries/tswucoveragemcv.htm>.
(4) World Health Organization Regional Office of the Western Pacific.
Monitoring measles surveillance and progress towards measles
elimination. Measles Bulletin 2007;1:1--3. Available at
<http://www.wpro.who.int/nr/rdonlyres/7be6353c-7d82-4368-a300-57db3f38148d/0/measbulletinissue13.pdf>.
(5) World Health Organization Regional Office of the Western Pacific.
Field guidelines for measles elimination. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization; 2004. Available at
<http://www.wpro.who.int/nr/rdonlyres/0f24b92e-ae2c-4c9b-b73b-e16acb833c35/0/fieldguidelines_for_measleselimination.pdf>.
(6) World Health Organization Regional Office of the Western Pacific.
Tables 2a and 2b. Measles Bulletin 2009;3:3--4 Available at
<http://www.wpro.who.int/nr/rdonlyres/fe4ce60a-5418-4a39-a666-0ce86aa4465e/0/measbulletinvol3issue1.pdf>.
(7) CDC. Progress toward measles elimination---Japan, 1999--2008.
MMWR 2008;57:1049--52.
(8) CDC. Elimination of measles---South Korea, 2001--2006. MMWR 2007;56:304--7.
(9) Heywood AE, Gidding HF, Riddell MA, et al. Elimination of endemic
measles transmission in Australia. Bull World Health Organ 2009;87:64--71.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Measles elimination is defined by the WHO as the absence of endemic
measles virus transmission. Remarkable progress has been achieved
since the initiation of the program in 1999 and the definition of
goals in 2003. Much has been achieved, but the target for elimination
by 2012 is perhaps optimistic.

The Western Pacific Region includes 37 countries and areas:
Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Hong Kong (China,
Special Administrative Region [SAR]), Macau (China, SAR), Japan,
Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Viet
Nam, and 21 Pacific island countries and areas including American
Samoa, Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands, Cook Islands,
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam,
Kiribati, Marshall Islands, New Caledonia, Niue, Nauru, Pitcairn
Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and
Wallis and Futuna.

In 2006, the Republic of Korea declared measles eliminated after
having successfully implemented WHO-recommended strategies. Also, all
21 Pacific island countries have reported zero measles cases in 2007
and 2008, and cases in Australia and Macao (China SAR) have, on the
basis of genotype analysis, been largely attributed to importations. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2008
----
Measles eradication - worldwide: update 2000-2007 20081205.3829
2007
----
Measles eradication - Worldwide: new targets 20070125.0341
2006
----
Measles, control activities - Africa: 1999-2005 20060921.2700
....................................................cp/msp/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
