<header id=052082>
Published Date: 2008-04-18 19:57:20 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Malignant catarrhal fever, bovine - USA (TX)
Archive Number: 20080418.1396
</header>
<body id=052082>
MALIGNANT CATARRHAL FEVER, BOVINE - USA (TEXAS)
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: 18 Apr 2008
Source: USDA [edited]
<http://www.aphis.usda.gov/newsroom/content/2008/04/malignant_cath_fever.shtml>


Statement by John Clifford, Chief Veterinary Medical Officer,
Regarding Detection of Malignant Catarrhal Fever in Commercial Cattle

"Yesterday, we received confirmatory test results from our National
Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL) in Ames, Iowa, diagnosing
wildebeest-associated malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) in a cow from a
mixed-use operation in Texas. The disease appears to have spread to
the animal from exposure to captive wildebeests on the same property.
It is important to note that MCF is not a contagious disease in
cattle and poses no threat to human health. It cannot be transmitted
between people and animals.

"USDA foreign animal disease diagnosticians and state animal health
officials are conducting an epidemiological investigation into the
incident and are tracing the movement of all potentially affected
animals from the premises of origin. A total of 134 breeding heifers
from this herd were recently shipped to Illinois, Arkansas, Alabama,
Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas. Because cattle cannot
transmit the disease to other cattle or livestock, the interstate
movement of these animals poses no risk.

"All cattle from the herd of origin have been placed on hold by State
animal health officials, and APHIS will be working with the States
and owners to depopulate the animals. The owners will be indemnified.
In addition, the Texas mixed-use operation is currently under
quarantine by State animal health officials.

"MCF is a herpes virus, and 2 strains are known to exist -- a
sheep-associated strain and a wildebeest-associated strain. Cattle
can contract both strains of the disease from affected sheep or
wildebeests, but do not spread either strain. The sheep-associated
strain of MCF is known to occur in the United States. The
wildebeest-associated strain of MCF, however, is foreign to the
United States. Both strains have high fatality rates in cattle. The
USDA is developing action plans to prevent future exposure of
susceptible species to potentially infected wildebeest.

"As a member nation of the World Organization for Animal Health
(OIE), we have notified OIE and our trading partners of this
detection. OIE requires member nations to report any occurrence of
certain transmissible animal diseases in order to successfully
monitor animal health on a worldwide basis. Wildebeest-associated MCF
is a reportable animal disease, although it is not classified as a
disease that has the potential for serious, rapid spread or public
health consequences."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The wildebeest-associated form of the disease is considered a
foreign animal disease in the United States and prompt action will be
taken.

Malignant catarrhal fever (MCF) is an infectious systemic disease
that presents as a variable complex of lesions affecting mainly
ruminants and rarely swine. It is principally a disease of domestic
cattle, water buffalo, Bali cattle (banteng), American bison, and
deer. In addition to these farmed animals, MCF has been described in
a variety of captive ruminants in mixed zoologic collections. In some
species, such as bison and some deer, MCF is acute and highly lethal,
capable of affecting large numbers of animals. With occasional
exceptions, the disease in cattle normally is seen sporadically and
affects single animals. MCF is typically fatal; however, there are
outbreaks in which several animals are affected, with evidence of
recovery and mild or inapparent infections in some cases. It also
occasionally presents as chronic alopecia and weight loss. Its
distribution is essentially worldwide, mirroring that of the
principal carriers, domestic sheep and wildebeest. MCF has long been
a major problem in farmed deer operations, and in recent years has
emerged as a severe threat to the commercial bison industry.

MCF results from infection by one of several members of a group of
closely related ruminant gammaherpesviruses of the Rhadinovirus
genus. While the MCF group of ruminant rhadinoviruses currently
comprises about 10 known members, only a few are known to be
pathogenic under natural conditions. The principal carriers and their
viruses are sheep (ovine herpesvirus-2), wildebeest (alcelaphine
herpesvirus-1), and goats (caprine herpesvirus-2). Another strain of
unidentified origin has caused MCF in white-tailed deer. Virtually
all clinical cases are caused by the sheep or wildebeest viruses.

The viruses are maintained within the sheep and wildebeest
populations in similar but not identical patterns. Lambs are infected
usually at 1-2 mo of age by aerosol transmission from other
individuals within the flock and begin to actively shed virus at 6 mo
of age. Shedding decreases at 10 mo, with adults shedding at a much
lower rate than adolescents. Wildebeest calves, in contrast, are
infected in the perinatal period by horizontal and occasional
intrauterine transmission, and actively shed virus until 3-4 mo of
age. Transmission is by transfer of virus-laden nasal secretions by
direct contact or poorly defined airborne routes. In Africa, most
wildebeest-associated MCF is seen around the time of calving;
however, sheep-associated MCF (SA-MCF) does not follow the same
pattern. Ewes do not shed virus in placental tissues or secretions
and do not experience more frequent shedding episodes around lambing
time. The only rational and established factors contributing to
seasonality of SA-MCF are climatic influences on virus survival and
the age-related shedding patterns in lambs. The epidemiology of the
caprine MCF virus appears similar to that of sheep.

The severity of SA-MCF outbreaks depends on factors such as the total
numbers, population density, and species of susceptible hosts
involved; the closeness of contact; and the amount of shed virus
available for transmission. Cases usually are seen sporadically in
European breeds of cattle ( Bos taurus ), as they are a relatively
resistant species. By contrast, Bali cattle, bison, and some but not
all cervid species (e.g., white-tailed deer, Pere David's deer) are
highly susceptible. As agricultural systems involving bison and deer
production have developed, MCF has become more troublesome. It is a
leading cause of infectious disease losses on New Zealand deer farms.
In bison exposed to large numbers of adolescent sheep, losses can be
devastating. About 800 head died in one outbreak in the USA in 2003.

Among animals that survive, infection is lifelong; some susceptible
species may be latently infected. Recrudescence of latent infections
is common and must be considered for cases with no known history of
contact with carriers.

MCF is transmitted only between carriers and clinically susceptible
animals. Affected animals do not transmit MCF to their cohorts.

Acute MCF cases caused by ovine herpesvirus-2 and alcelaphine
herpesvirus-1 are similar clinically and pathologically. Disease
course may range from peracute to chronic. Cases in deer are often
peracute with sudden death. Deer that survive for a few days and
bison usually develop hemorrhagic diarrhea, bloody urine, and corneal
opacity before expiring. High fever (106 DEGF-107 DEGF [41-41.5
DEGC]) and depression are common. Other signs that may be present
include catarrhal inflammation; erosions and mucopurulent exudation
affecting the upper respiratory, ocular, and oral mucosa; swollen
lymph nodes; lameness; and CNS signs (depression, trembling,
hyporesponsiveness, stupor, aggressiveness, convulsions). Variation
in organ system involvement sometimes can be seen in the same
outbreak, and is at least partially related to survival time after
disease onset. On average, the time to death in European cattle
breeds is somewhat longer than in deer, bison, water buffalo, and
Bali cattle. In cattle, swollen lymph nodes and severe eye lesions
(panophthalmitis, hypopyon, corneal erosions) are more frequent, and
hemorrhagic enteritis and cystitis less frequent, than in deer and
bison. Skin lesions (erythema, exudation, cracking, crust formation)
are common in animals that do not succumb quickly. Up to 25 percent
of cattle experience chronic disease, and sometimes the disease waxes
and wanes. Most eventually die, but approximately 5 percent
clinically recover. Hematologic parameters are not rewarding.

The disease is systemic, and lesions may be found in any organ,
although severity and frequency varies greatly. The principal lesions
are inflammation and necrosis of respiratory, alimentary, or urinary
mucosal epithelium; subepithelial lymphoid infiltration; generalized
lymphoid proliferation and necrosis; and widespread vasculitis.
Mucosal ulcerations and hemorrhage are common. Hemorrhages any be
present in many parenchymatous organs, particularly lymph nodes. A
classic but not pathognomonic histologic lesion is fibrinoid necrosis
of small muscular arteries, but vessels of all types may be inflamed,
including those in the brain. Prominent white nodules representing
intramural and perivascular proliferation may be apparent,
particularly in the kidney.

Diagnosis of MCF is based on clinical signs, gross and histologic
lesions, and laboratory confirmation. Primary differential diagnoses
include bovine viral diarrhea/mucosal disease, rinderpest, infectious
bovine rhinotracheitis, and East Coast fever (theileriosis). When CNS
involvement is prominent, MCF can resemble rabies and the tickborne
encephalitides. A history of contact with a carrier species (sheep,
goats, or wildebeest) can be helpful, although recrudescent cases can
be seen without such a history. Reliable and specific laboratory
assays for antibody and for viral DNA are available. The test of
choice for clinical diagnosis is PCR to detect viral DNA. Preferred
tissues for testing are anticoagulated blood, kidney, intestinal
wall, lymph node, and brain.

Serology is used for surveying normal animals and is indicative only
of infection -- latent infection among susceptible animals may render
serology alone inconclusive evidence of current disease. Several
seroassays are available, including viral neutralization,
immunoperoxidase, immunofluorescence, and ELISA. The polyclonal
assays are hampered by cross-reactivity. The monoclonal-based
competitive ELISA is currently the most specific and detects antibody
against all of the known MCF group viruses. Only PCR can discriminate
between the different viruses.

The prognosis is grave. No treatment has been found to provide any
consistent benefit. Stress reduction of subclinical or mildly
affected animals is indicated. No vaccine is available. Sheep can be
produced that are free of virus by early weaning and isolation. The
only other effective control strategy is separation of carriers from
susceptible species. When large numbers of potent shedders are
present, such as in lamb feedlots, considerable distances are
necessary to protect highly susceptible species such as bison.

Extracted from the Merck Veterinary Manual:
<http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/55700.htm&word=malignant%2ccatarrhal%2cfever>

- Mod.TG]
....................tg/ejp/lm


*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
