<header id=005724>
Published Date: 2011-09-24 10:55:04 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) - Europe
Archive Number: 20110924.2898
</header>
<body id=005724>
TRYPANOSOMIASIS (CHAGAS DISEASE) - EUROPE
*****************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 22 Sep 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance edition 2011; 16(38) [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19975


Ref: Albajar-Vinas P, Jannin: The hidden Chagas disease burden in
Europe. Euro Surveill. 2011; 16(38):pii=19975
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Chagas disease in non-endemic countries -- that is, in countries
outside Latin America with exceptional or no vectorial transmission
such as in Europe -- has come to light since the beginning of 2000.
The emergence of the disease in those countries was mainly linked to
population mobility, notably migration.

During the last century, Chagas disease cases were detected in
non-endemic countries in North America (Canada and the United States)
and the Western Pacific Region (mainly Australia and Japan), and only
more recently in Europe [1,2].

The history of Chagas disease in Europe can be divided in 3
significant periods. The initial period, started at the beginning of
the 1980s, when the 1st Chagas disease case in Europe was published
[3], 72 years after Carlos Ribeiro Justiniano Chagas discovered the
disease in Brazil [4]. Since then, successive sporadic publications
have started to draw attention to the existence of Chagas disease
cases in different European countries and the existence of the
responsible parasite _Trypanosoma cruzi_. These publications describe
infection transmission in Europe through different non-vectorial
routes such as transfusional, congenital, and laboratory-accident
transmission, as well as sporadically through the arrival of infected
travellers such as tourists, people visiting friends and relatives,
and adopted children [5].

The year 2000 marked the beginning of a 2nd period, characterised by
an increase in the number of cases reported in the scientific
literature in many European countries [6]. According to the
International Organization for Migration an important increase of
migration between Europe and Latin America, predominantly to southern
European countries, and mainly to Spain, was documented.

Major causes contributing to this migration phenomenon were the
economic hardship caused by the recession and high poverty levels in
Latin America and tightening of visa regimes in the United States
after 2001. The close cultural and historic ties of Latin American
countries to Europe and the possibility for many Latin Americans to
appeal to dual nationality because they frequently have European
ancestors, have also facilitated population mobility in that
direction. Demographically, the migrant population was young, with
high rates of labour force participation, and relatively high rates of
educational attainment, with great capacity to integrate into European
societies. Additionally, they represented a prime example of the
current worldwide trend towards the feminisation of migration, which
is relevant in the context of Chagas disease because of the
possibility of congenital transmission from infected mothers. Finally,
there was also a significant number of undocumented migrants, and that
irregular migration posed a significant challenge to governments [7].

The year 2007 marked the beginning of a 3rd period in the history of
Chagas disease in Europe, characterised by various initiatives
launched at different levels. In July 2007, the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
convened a meeting entitled Revisiting Chagas disease: from a Latin
American health perspective to a global health perspective, with
participants of 28 Latin American and non-Latin American countries
where the disease was present. A major outcome of the meeting was to
highlight the presence of _T. cruzi_ infection outside Latin America
in the so-called non-endemic countries and an initiative to deal with
Chagas disease in non-endemic countries, supplementing the existing
intergovernmental initiatives for the control of Chagas disease in
Latin America [8].

With the main objectives of assessing the burden of Chagas disease as
a public health problem in non-endemic countries and formulating an
appropriate response, the WHO organised a series of meetings in 2008
and 2009 that culminated in the Informal Consultation on the Control
and Prevention of Chagas disease in Europe, in the 1st profiles of
European countries with Chagas disease cases and the 1st statement
acknowledging that the disease has emerged as an important public
health challenge [5,9].

In May 2010 the 63rd World Health Assembly approved the new resolution
WHA63; which recognises the increased number of cases of Chagas
disease in countries where the disease is not endemic and states that
all transmission routes have to be tackled. It further promotes the
integration of patients with acute and chronic clinical forms of
Chagas disease into primary health services and calls for a
mobilisation of national and international, public and private
financial and human resources, for the promotion of intersectorial
efforts and collaboration, and for the facilitation of networking
between organisations and partners [10]. The 63rd World Health
Assembly also called for the establishment of an initiative of
non-endemic countries aiming at interconnecting all those regions and
countries that have patients. Finally, in October 2010, the 1st WHO
report on neglected tropical diseases included Chagas disease as one
of the 17 listed diseases [2].

>From the point of view of the legal framework, the 1st official
reference to Chagas disease at the European Union level was made in
the European Commission's Directive 2004/23/CE [11] amending Directive
2002/98/CE [12] of the European Parliament and Council (2003) on
quality and safety of blood, which concerns technical criteria
relating to blood and blood donations. Annex III of the directive
defines the admission criteria for blood donors or blood types and the
minimal exclusion criteria for donations from donors who have or had
parasitological diseases; the exclusion of Chagas disease carriers is
specified. Other European directives, including 2005/62/CE, establish
norms to be followed by institutions when carrying out blood
transfusions with blood imported from other countries. In February
2006, the European Parliament published a new directive 2006/17/CE
[13] on the donation and control of human tissues and cells, which
referred to Chagas disease. The directive relates to the screening of
donors based on their epidemiological history and travel to endemic
areas. Aligned with European Union directives, France, Spain, and the
United Kingdom implemented national measures to control transfusional
transmission of Chagas disease [14,15].

The present timely special edition of Eurosurveillance, published in 2
parts, is a useful instrument to review and update diverse aspects of
Chagas disease in Europe related to topics such as the current
epidemiological situation, primary and secondary prevention of _T.
cruzi_ infection, including congenital cases, control of transmission
by transfusion and organ transplantation, care of patients,
information, education and communication instruments, and the
information and surveillance systems in place in countries within and
outside of the European Union.

Basile et al [16] reviewed the epidemiological situation of the 9
European countries with the highest estimated prevalence of _T. cruzi_
infection, and the difficulties of dealing with a frequently silent
and under- or misdiagnosed disease for which neither acute nor chronic
cases are captured by compulsory notification. They point out the need
for and challenge of an information and surveillance system in Europe
that considers also the number of undocumented migrants. The lack or
inconsistency of accurate epidemiological numbers of people with _T.
cruzi_ infection or Chagas disease can perpetuate the vicious circle
of a silent and, in a way, silenced disease.

Along the same lines, the characteristics of patients attended and
documented in the EuroTravNet provide precious information on the
epidemiological and clinical profile of most of patients, together
with the urgent necessity of implementing active measures to increase
detection and access to diagnosis and treatment [17]. Other very
interesting examples describing possible mechanisms to increase
detection and care, and to make the disease more visible, are offered
in articles from Italy and Switzerland [18,19].

These are countries with high absolute and relative numbers of _T.
cruzi_-infected people, especially in certain regions or cantons. They
have even seen reported acute cases of congenital transmission or oral
transmission in a tourist coming back from a short trip to an endemic
country. The need of an interdisciplinary approach, from the medical
to the sociological sciences, taking into account all involved actors,
including the patients themselves, is appointed as the unique solution
to break the disease silence [20].

In terms of the possibility of implementing secondary prevention of
congenital transmission linked to an information system in Europe, 2
pioneer experiences from Spain illustrate faced challenges and
successful strategic measures to enhance the number of screened
mothers and limit the number of lost patients in the after birth
follow-up [21,22].

Nevertheless, as described by Navarro et al [23], implementing a
protocol for the screening of pregnant women and the early diagnosis
of infected newborns and their siblings requires also an essential
component of information, education, and communication (IEC), adapted
to the emotional meaning Chagas disease for the affected population
and their knowledge about it [23].

Moreover, any IEC component should include all involved actors, from
health personnel to patients, including local non-governmental
associations. Also from Spain comes a significant study by Valerio et
al [24] reviewing the epidemiological data of _T. cruzi_ infection and
Chagas disease clinical chronic manifestations, especially in groups
at risk of being infected. These studies evidence that it is essential
to know the characteristics of the migrated population in terms of
age, country of origin and exposition to infection, in order to
propose adequate cost-effective protocols for laboratory and clinical
screening and diagnosis, patient care and preventive and control
measures [23,24].

It is necessary to move ahead with the description of Chagas disease
in Europe. At-risk groups of migrants who lived in endemic areas
before Chagas disease control measures were implemented in Latin
America can have a high prevalence of infection and disease. But it is
also logical to think that Chagas disease in non-endemic countries,
with a reduced possibility of reinfection or co-infections with other
parasitic diseases, with high standards of hygiene and nutritional
status, could be characterised by a lower morbidity and mortality. We
are convinced that this special issue will stimulate further lively
discussions around this disease, but also the implementation of the
necessary measures to make it visible, stop transmission and provide
care to patients in Europe.

References
----------
1. Coura JR, Vinas PA: Chagas disease: a new worldwide challenge.
Nature. 2010; 465(7301): S6-7.
2. World Health Organization (WHO). Working to overcome the global
impact of neglected tropical diseases: first WHO report on neglected
tropical diseases. Geneva: WHO; 2010. Available from
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/2010report/en/.
3. Pehrson PO, Wahlgren M, Bengtsson E: Asymptomatic congenital
Chagas' disease in a 5-year-old child. Scand J Infect Dis. 1981;
13(4): 307-8.
4. Chagas C: Nova tripanozomiase humana. Estudos sobre a morfolojia e
o ciclo evolutivo de _Schizotrypanum cruzi_ n. gen., n. sp., ajente
etiolojico de nova entidade morbida do homen. [New human
trypanozomiasis. Studies on the morphology and evolutionary cycle of
_Schizotrypanum cruzi_ n. gen., n. sp., aetiological agent of a new
human morbid entity]. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 1909; 1: 159-218.
Portuguese.
5. World Health Organization (WHO): Control and prevention of Chagas
disease in Europe. Report of a WHO Informal Consultation (jointly
organized by WHO headquarters and the WHO Regional Office for Europe)
Geneva, Switzerland, 17-18 Dec 2009. Final report. Geneva: WHO; 2010.
Report No.: WHO/HTM/NTD/IDM/2010.1. Available from
http://www.fac.org.ar/1/comites/chagas/Chagas_WHO_Technical%20Report_16_06_10.pdf.
6. Schmunis GA: Epidemiology of Chagas disease in non-endemic
countries: the role of international migration. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz.
2007; 102 Suppl 1:75-85.
7. International Organization for Migration. Migration from Latin
America to Europe: trends and policy challenges. IOM Migration
Research Series No. 16. Geneva: IOM; 2004. Available from
http://publications.iom.int/bookstore/index.php?main_page=product_info&products_id=199.
8. World Health Organization (WHO). New global effort to eliminate
Chagas disease. Geneva: WHO; 3 July 2007. Available from
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2007/pr36/en/index.html.
9. Angheben A, Bartoloni A, Anselmi M, Gradoni L, Bottieau E, Carlier
Y et al: Infection a _Trypanosoma cruzi_/maladie de Chagas en Europe.
Conclusions du sixieme congres europeen de medecine tropicale et sante
internationale. [_Trypanosoma cruzi_/Chagas disease in Europe.
Conclusions of the 6th European congress of tropical medicine and
international health]. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2010; 103: 359-63.
10. World Health Organization (WHO). Chagas disease: control and
elimination. A63/20. 63rd World Health Assembly. Geneva, 18-22 May
2009. Available from
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/mediacentre/WHA_63.20_Eng.pdf.
11. European Commission. Directive 2004/23/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards of
quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing,
preservation, storage, and distribution of human tissues and cells.
Official Journal of the European Union. L 102/48. Luxembourg:
Publications Office of the European Union; 2004. Available from
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2004:102:0048:0058:EN:PDF.
12. European Commission. Directive 2002/98/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 setting standards of
quality and safety for the collection, testing, processing, storage,
and distribution of human blood and blood components and amending
Directive 2001/83/EC. Official Journal of the European Union. L 33/30.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union; 2003. Available
from
http://eulex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:033:0030:0040:EN:PDF.
13. European Commission. Commission Directive 2006/17/EC of 8 February
2006 implementing Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council as regards certain technical requirements for the
donation, procurement, and testing of human tissues and cells. L
38/40. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union; 2006.
Available from
http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2006:038:0040:0052:EN:PDF.
14. Rapport d'activites 2006. [Report of activities 2006]. La Plaine
saint-Denis: Etablissement francais du Sang; 2007.
15. Real Decreto 1088/2005, de 16 de septiembre, por el que se
establecen los requisitos tecnicos y condiciones minimas de la
hemodonacion y de los centros y servicios de transfusion. [Royal
Decree 1088/2005 of 16 Sep 2005 establishing the minimum technical
requisites and conditions for blood donation and for blood transfusion
centres and services]. Boletin Oficial del Estado. 2005; 225:
31288-304. Madrid: Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo; 2005. Available
from http://www.boe.es/boe/dias/2005/09/20/pdfs/A31288-31304.pdf.
16. Basile L, Jansy JM, Carlier Y, Salamanca DD, Angheben A, Bartoloni
A, et al: Chagas disease in European countries: the challenge of a
surveillance system. Euro Surveill. 2011; 16(37): pii=19968. Available
from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19968.
17. Perez-Molina JA, Perez-Ayala A, Parola P, Jackson Y, Odolini S,
Lopez-Velez R, et al: EuroTravNet: imported Chagas disease in nine
European countries, 2008 to 2009. Euro Surveill. 2011; 16(37):
pii=19966. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19966.
18. Angheben A, Anselmi M, Gobbi F, Marocco S, Monteiro G, Buonfrate
D, et al: Chagas disease in Italy: breaking an epidemiological
silence. Euro Surveill. 2011; 16(37): pii=19969. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19969.
19. Jackson Y, Chappuis F: Chagas disease in Switzerland: history and
challenges. Euro Surveill. 2011; 16(37): pii=19963. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19963.
20. Di Girolamo C, Bodini C, Marta BL, Ciannameo A, Cacciatore F:
Chagas disease at the crossroad of international migration and public
health policies: why a national screening might not be enough . Euro
Surveill. 2011; 16(37): pii=19965. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19965.
21. Flores-Chavez MD, Merino FJ, Garcia-Bujalance S, Martin-Rabadan P,
Merino P, Garcia-Bermejo I, et al: Surveillance of Chagas disease in
pregnant women in Madrid, Spain, from 2008 to 2010. Euro Surveill.
2011; 16(38): pii=19974. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19974.
22. Basile L, Oliveira I, Ciruela P, Plasencia A, working group for
developing the Catalonian Screening Programme for congenital
transmission of Chagas disease: The current screening programme for
congenital transmission of Chagas disease in Catalonia, Spain. Euro
Surveill. 2011;16(38):pii=19972. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19972.
23. Navarro M, Perez-Ayala A, Guionnet A, Perez-Molina JA, Navaza B,
Estevez L, et al: Targeted screening and health education for Chagas
disease tailored to at-risk migrants in Spain, 2007 to 2010. Euro
Surveill. 2011; 16(38): pii=19973. Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19973.
24. Valerio L, Roure S, Sabria M, Balanzo X, Valles X, Seres L:
Clinical, electrocardiographic and echocardiographic abnormalities in
Latin American migrants with newly diagnosed of Chagas disease
2005-2009, Barcelona, Spain. Euro Surveill. 2011; 16(38): pii=19971.
Available from
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19971

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The presence of Chagas disease in immigrants from South- and Central
America is an important problem. A recent study from Spain (Ramos JM
et al: Chagas disease in Latin American pregnant immigrants:
experience in a non-endemic country.
Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2011. [Epub ahead of print]) found 1.3 percent of
pregnant women from endemic areas were seropositive and 10 percent in
pregnant women from Bolivia, with the risk of congenital Chagas
disease.

Transmission can also take place by blood transfusion as highlighted
in the review above from Eurosurveillance.

In the United States autochthonous transmission of _T. cruzi_ appears
to be extremely rare. 5 persons are known to have become infected with
_T. cruzi_ through organ transplants, and prior to the implementation
of blood donor screening in 2007, 5 instances of transmission by
transfusion had been reported (Kirchhoff LV: Epidemiology of American
trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease). Adv Parasitol. 2011; 75: 1-18).

In recent years, food borne transmission of Chagas disease has been
highlighted (see ProMED-mail postings below) in endemic countries,
which indicates that control of Chagas may be more complicated than
anticipated. - Mod.EP]
See Also
2009
----
Trypanosomiasis - Spain ex Latin America 20090209.0592
2007
----
Trypanosomiasis, foodborne - Venezuela: (Caracas) (02) 20071231.4192
Trypanosomiasis, foodborne - Brazil (Amazonia) 20070821.2732
2006
----
Trypanosomiasis, foodborne - Brazil (PA) 20060728.2085
2005
----
Trypanosomiasis, foodborne - Brazil (Santa Catarina) (05) 20050401.0940
Trypanosomiasis - Brazil (Amapa) 20050331.0929
1997
----
Chagas disease vector (05) 19970118.0105
Chagas disease - Latin America 19970114.0066
1996
----
Trypanosomes, New World, Symposium - Guyana 1996 19960830.1493
.................................................sb/ep/mj/ml
</body>
