<header id=052439>
Published Date: 2011-12-20 04:56:05 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed deformity, cervids - USA: (multistate): RFI
Archive Number: 20111220.3638
</header>
<body id=052439>
UNDIAGNOSED DEFORMITY, CERVIDS - USA: (MULTISTATE): REQUEST FOR
INFORMATION
***************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 13 Dec 2011
Source: Mlive.com [edited]
http://www.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/2011/12/odd_cass_county_deer_may_offer.html?


A Cass County deer may offer clues as to what ails other malformed
animals here and in other states.

The deer with the swollen face is not the only one in Michigan, but he
may provide clues about what is causing the odd malady to hit
whitetail deer here and in other states.

Dale Wallace, a Cass County hunter is submitting the head of a deer he
shot last week to scientists in Georgia who are studying similar
animals found in eastern states and recently in Idaho. The deer also
is similar to 3 animals a Michigan researcher has seen in recent
years, 2 from Barry County in 2002 and one in Ionia County in 2004.

Thomas M. Cooley, wildlife biologist and pathologist with the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources Wildlife Disease Lab, said he has
already discussed those animals with University of Georgia scientist
Kevin Keel. Cooley said the only consistent finding in the few
Michigan deer his group has studied has been the presence of
demodectic mange mites, spider-like bugs that spread the skin
condition mange.

Keel, a veterinarian at the University of Georgia, said he has
diagnosed similar deer with a chronic bacterial infection. He believes
the swelling of the nose is due to the accumulation of connective
tissue underneath the skin that is induced by inflammatory cells.

"I am currently trying to determine what type of bacteria might be
responsible," Keel said. "Previously, the bacteriology lab has been
unsuccessful in getting the species of bacteria present to grow. I am
going to try to use genetic methods to determine what it might be.
Once we have some idea of what we are dealing with, if it is similar
to known bacteria, we may be able to tailor culture conditions to
better suit it."

Keel said he was aware that other researchers had identified mites in
the hair follicles of similar deer, but his finding suggests bacteria
not mites as the common factor, and probably not a "new" bacteria.

"Deer may be coming in contact with something that they weren't
exposed to previously due to alterations in their habits." he said.
"Or perhaps there is some factor that is predisposing them to
infection by a species of bacteria that is common in the environment.
With so few cases, we may never fully understand what is causing it."

Both he and Cooley agreed that with so few cases, whatever is going on
doesn't yet seem to offer any real threat to deer populations.

"But any time something new pops up," Keel said, "it behooves us to
get a better understanding of it and to be certain that it doesn't
represent a threat to animal or human health. Every sample helps to
get a more complete picture of the bacteria involved."

Wallace was able to provide scientists with other observations that
might be helpful. On the web cam photos of the animal, for instance,
it is always alone, never with other deer, leading him to wonder
whether the other animals were avoiding it.

The animal's hide was very tough, and had several areas of tough white
tissue connecting it to the body, not the usual thin membrane.

The hide was also marked by discolored rings similar in appearance to
ringworm, Wallace said, and there were pockets of blood under the skin
along the neck, the processor found.

Cooley said it may take several weeks for testing to be completed and
for scientists to compare notes on the animal.

[Byline: Rosemary Parker]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[A map of Michigan may be found at http://healthmap.org/r/1yJn.

If you are interested in what these "deformed" deer look like, please
see http://media.mlive.com/news_impact/photo/10348749-large.jpg.

It is hard to believe the condition could be caused by mites, but the
exact cause cannot be definitively determined yet. - Mod.TG]

.................................................sb/tg/msp/lm
</body>
