<header id=059031>
Published Date: 2011-07-30 07:13:08 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Infectious salmon anemia - Chile
Archive Number: 20110730.2287
</header>
<body id=059031>
INFECTIOUS SALMON ANEMIA - CHILE
********************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 28 Jul 2011
Source: Bloomberg News [edited]
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-07-28/chile-salmon-farmer-multiexport-gains-as-virus-concern-recedes.html


Chile Salmon Farmer Multiexport Gains as Virus Concern Recedes
--------------------------------------------------------------
Chilean salmon farmer Multiexport Foods SA ended a 3-day losing streak
today after authorities said a virus recently confirmed at one fishing
center had not affected production, quelling fears of an outbreak.

A single production center, operated by producer Acuimag SA, had
confirmed presence of the virus, and it is currently without any fish,
Chile's fishing regulator Sernapesca said in a report posted today on
its website. Acuimag Chief Executive Officer Jorge Torrejon was not
immediately available to comment, an assistant said by phone.

The agency reported 22 Jul 2011 that it had detected the presence of
infectious salmon anemia (ISA) virus in 23 fishing centers in southern
Chile. They included one operated by Multiexport, Santiago-based
brokerage Euroamerica Corredores de Bolsa wrote yesterday. An outbreak
of the ISA virus decimated Chile's salmon industry in 2007.

"There have been no reports of the strand that causes mortality,"
Patricia Pellegrini, an analyst at Santiago-based brokerage firm
Larrain Vial SA, said today in an e-mailed response to questions.
Salmon prices have risen in the last week, ending a downtrend,
Pellegrini said.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Infectious salmon anemia (ISA) is one of the most important viral
diseases of farmed Atlantic salmon. This highly contagious disease can
be insidious, with an initially low mortality rate; however, the
cumulative mortality can sometimes exceed 90 percent if the disease
remains unchecked. Infectious salmon anemia was 1st described in
Norway in 1984, and it continues to be a problem in that country
despite control measures.

Infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV) is a member of the genus
Isavirus in the family Orthomyxoviridae. Hemorrhagic kidney syndrome
is an old name for the disease in Atlantic salmon. In coho salmon, it
has also been called icterus syndrome.

Outbreaks of infectious salmon anemia occur mainly in farmed Atlantic
salmon (_Salmo salar_). Wild Atlantic salmon might also be
susceptible. Rarely, isolates have been reported to affect other
salmonids. One virus has been linked to outbreaks in coho salmon
(_Oncorhyncus kisutch_) in Chile. A different ISAV isolate caused
clinical signs in experimentally infected rainbow trout (_O. mykiss_).
The latter isolate was highly virulent for Atlantic salmon, but it
infected coho salmon subclinically.

The reservoir hosts for ISAV are unknown. In experiments, isolates
that are virulent for Atlantic salmon usually infect other fish
asymptomatically. Subclinical infections with these isolates have been
reported in salmonids

Horizontal transmission of ISAV occurs readily within a tank or net
pen. Transmission also takes place, although more slowly, between
salmon in different nets at a site, as well as between farms. ISAV
probably infects fish through the gills, but ingestion has not been
ruled out. This virus is shed in epidermal mucus, urine, feces and
gonadal fluids. In one study, virus shedding was 1st detected 7 days
after inoculation, and rose above the minimum infective dose on day
11, 2 days before the 1st deaths occurred. Shedding peaked
approximately 15 days after inoculation, when mortalities were high.
ISAV also occurs in blood and tissues; tissue wastes from infected
fish are infectious. ISAV replicates best at the cold temperatures
where salmon thrive (5-15 deg C [41-59 deg F]). The optimal growth
temperature for this virus in cell lines is 10-15 deg C (50-59 deg F);
it does not replicate when the temperature is 25 deg C (77 deg F) or
higher. Fish that survive the illness can shed the virus for more than
a month.

Epidemiological studies suggest that ISAV can be transmitted
indirectly in water and on fomites, as well as by close contact
between fish. Horizontal transmission can occur in both freshwater and
seawater. Sea lice (_Lepeophtheirus salmonis_ and _Caligus_ sp.) may
be mechanical vectors. These parasites could also increase the
susceptibility of fish by increasing stress.

In farmed Atlantic salmon, the clinical signs may include lethargy,
anemia, leukopenia, ascites, exophthalmia, darkened skin and increased
mortality. In some cases, the hematocrit may be nearly normal; in
others, severe anemia with a hematocrit as low as 2-3 percent may be
seen. As a result of the anemia, the gills may be pale. Hemorrhages
may be found in the anterior chamber of the eye. Jaundice on the
ventral portion of the body has been reported among Atlantic salmon in
Chile.

Similar signs, including anemia and pale gills, were seen in farmed
coho salmon in Chile. Jaundice, with yellowing of the base of the fins
and on the abdomen, was reported in this species.

If infectious salmon anemia is detected, aggressive depopulation of
the affected cages can decrease losses. Early detection by regular
surveillance can improve the effectiveness of this technique, as fish
can shed ISAV before the mortality rate increases. Most salmon
producing countries enforce mandatory depopulation and disinfection of
infected cages; however, the specific strategy may vary between
countries. For example, some countries may manage infections at the
cage or pen level, while others mandate depopulation of the farm.
Quarantines and movement controls are used to prevent the virus from
spreading to other farms. Fallowing of infected sites helps eliminate
viruses that may remain in seawater and/or marine life and fomites in
the area.

Because there is still some controversy about the possibility of
vertical transmission, some fish industries (including the U.S.) have
adopted broodstock screening techniques for ISA. Egg disinfection,
which is used to control a variety of fish diseases, would be
effective against viruses transmitted on the surface of the egg.

Nonpathogenic (e.g., HPR0) isolates that can be detected only by
RT-PCR do not necessarily trigger automatic disease control efforts.
The prevalence of these viruses among salmonid and non-salmonid fish,
and their potential to generate virulent isolates, is still poorly
understood. Their existence could mean that the complete elimination
of infectious salmon anemia among sea-raised salmon might be
impossible.

There is no indication that ISAV can affect humans. Because this virus
is inactivated at body temperatures of 37-40 deg C (98.6-104 deg F),
it is unlikely to infect any mammal or bird.

This comment has been extracted from
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/infectious_salmon_anemia.pdf
- Mod.TG

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for Chile is available at:
http://healthmap.org/r/00Bj - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
2010
----
Infectious salmon anemia - Chile 20100820.2909
Infectious salmon anemia - Chile (02): (MA) 20101109.4064
2009
----
Infectious salmon anemia - Chile 20090715.2526
Infectious salmon anemia - Chile (02): origin 20090719.2568
.................................................tg/ejp/dk
</body>
