<header id=037038>
Published Date: 2011-07-30 07:16:48 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Mucormycosis, fatal - USA (02): (MO) tornado-related
Archive Number: 20110730.2288
</header>
<body id=037038>
MUCORMYCOSIS, FATAL - USA (02): (MISSOURI) TORNADO-RELATED
**********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 29 Jul 2011
Source: CDC. Notes from the Field: Fatal Fungal Soft-Tissue Infections
After a Tornado --- Joplin, Missouri, 2011 MMWR 29 July 2011 /
60(29);992. [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6029a5.htm?s_cid=mm6029a5_w


On 22 May 2011, at 5:34 p.m. a tornado with winds >200 mph struck
Joplin, Missouri, injuring approximately 1000 persons and causing 159
deaths. On 3 Jun 2011, a local physician notified the
Springfield-Greene County Health Department and the Missouri
Department of Health and Senior Services (MODHSS) of 2 patients
hospitalized with tornado injuries who had suspected necrotizing
fungal soft-tissue infections. MODHSS initiated active surveillance
for such infections at hospitals and laboratories serving patients
injured in the tornado, and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) began assisting the MODHSS with identification of
fungal isolates. By 10 Jun 2011, 8 patients with necrotizing fungal
soft-tissue wound infections caused by Mucormycetes (formerly
Zygomycetes) were identified. On 14 Jun 2011, a CDC field team arrived
in Missouri to assist with the on-site investigation.

As of 19 Jul 2011, a total of 18 suspected cases of cutaneous
mucormycosis had been identified, of which 13 were confirmed. A
confirmed case was defined as 1) necrotizing soft-tissue infection
requiring antifungal treatment or surgical debridement in a person
injured in the tornado, 2) with illness onset on or after 22 May 2011,
and 3) positive fungal culture or histopathology and genetic
sequencing consistent with a Mucormycete. No additional cases have
been reported since 17 Jun 2011.

The field team reviewed medical charts to describe the 13 confirmed
cases. The median age of the patients was 48 years (range: 13--76
years); 7 were female, and all were white. Injuries sustained during
the tornado included lacerations (12 patients), fractures (11), and
blunt trauma (9). The 13 patients had an average of 4 wounds
documented in the medical chart when they were examined at the
emergency department. Post-trauma wound management included surgical
debridement for all 13 patients and removal of a foreign body from 6.
Wooden splinters were the most common foreign body, found in the
wounds of 4 patients. 2 patients had diabetes, and none were
immunocompromised. 10 patients required admission to an intensive-care
unit, and 5 died.

The CDC received 48 clinical specimens, including 32 fungal isolates
and 16 tissue blocks collected from wounds for microscopic evaluation,
immunohistochemical staining, and DNA sequencing; specimens from all
13 patients yielded the mucormycete _Apophysomyces trapeziformis_.
Further laboratory and epidemiologic studies are ongoing, including
case-control studies to evaluate risk factors for infection.

Cutaneous mucormycosis is a rare infection caused by fungi of the
order _Mucorales_, which typically are found in soil and decaying wood
and other organic matter. Although cutaneous mucormycosis often is
opportunistic, affecting patients with diabetes, hematologic
malignancy or solid organ transplant (1), _A. trapeziformis_ often is
associated with immunocompetent hosts after traumatic implantation of
fungal spores (2). The case-fatality rate for cutaneous mucormycosis
has ranged from 29 percent to 83 percent, depending on severity of
disease and underlying medical condition of the patient (1). Early
diagnosis, aggressive surgical debridement, and administration of
systemic antifungals have been associated with improved outcomes (1).

Cutaneous mucormycosis has been reported after previous natural
disasters (3,4); however, this is the 1st known cluster occurring
after a tornado. None of the infections were found in persons cleaning
up debris. Health-care providers should consider environmental fungi
as potential causes of necrotizing soft-tissue infections in patients
injured during tornados and initiate early treatment for suspected
infections. Additional information is available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mucormycosis.

References:
---------------
1. Skiada A, Petrikkos G. Cutaneous zygomycosis. Clin Microbiol Infect
2009;15 Suppl 5:41--5.
2. Alvarez E, Stchigel A, Cano J, et al. Molecular phylogenetic
diversity of the emerging mucoralean fungus Apophysomyces: proposal of
three new species. Rev Iberoam Micol 2010;27:80--9.
3. Andresen D, Donaldson A, Choo L, et al. Multifocal cutaneous
mucormycosis complicating polymicrobial wound infections in a tsunami
survivor from Sri Lanka. Lancet 2005;365:876--8.
4. Patino JF, Castro D, Valencia A, et al. Necrotizing soft tissue
lesions after a volcanic cataclysm. World J Surg 1991;15:240--7.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[_Apophysomyces trapeziformis_ is a fungal species that is a member of
the class _Zygometes_, Order _Mucorales_, Family _Mucoraceae_, and
Genus _Apophysomyces_ (Ribes JA, Vanover-Sams CA, Baker DJ.
Zygomycetes in Human Disease. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13(2):236-301.
Available at: http://cmr.asm.org/cgi/content/abstract/13/2/236).

The following is extracted from ProMED-mail post Mucormycosis, fatal -
USA: (MO) tornado-related 20110612.1789:

"Zygomycoses are infections caused by fungi of the class_Zygomycetes_,
comprised of the orders _Mucorales_ and_Entomophthorales_.
Mucormycosis is the name given to infections caused by fungi of the
order _Mucorales_ that includes organisms of species
Â¬[_Apophysomyces_], _Rhizopus_, _Rhizomucor_, _Mucor_, and
_Cunninghamella_. They are quite ubiquitous in the environment, such
as soil and decaying vegetable matter. Although most individuals are
exposed to these fungi on a daily basis, usually only people with
weakened immune systems develop infection due to these organisms.
Types of infections due to these organisms include: infection of the
sinuses that can spread to the brain, most commonly seen in patients
with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus; and infection of the lungs.
These organisms characteristically are angioinvasive, often leading to
thrombosis, to infarction of involved tissues, and frequently to
dissemination, and the infections they cause have a rapid and often
fatal clinical course. The diagnosis of mucormycosis almost always
requires histopathologic evidence of fungal invasion of the tissues.
Culturing these organisms from an infected site is rarely sufficient
to establish the diagnosis because the fungus may colonize tissue
without causing infection and is a relatively frequent laboratory
contaminant.

"Infection caused by the _Entomophthorales_ is most often encountered
in tropical areas of the world where the causative fungi have been
isolated from both soil and plant detritus (Perez, MT, Gomez, JA,
Procop GW, et al: Nasofacial entomophthoromycosis: a case report and
brief review. Infect Dis Clin Pract 2009; 17(1): 44-7; abstract
available at
http://journals.lww.com/infectdis/Abstract/2009/01000/Nasofacial_Entomophthoromycosis__A_Case_Report_and.12.aspx;
and Spellberg B, Edwards J Jr, Ibrahim A: Novel perspectives on
mucormycosis: pathophysiology, presentation, and management. Clin
Microbiol Rev 2005; 18(3): 556-69; available at
http://cmr.asm.org/cgi/content/full/18/3/556).

"Additionally, necrotizing soft tissue infections caused by
_Mucorales_ have been described in immunocompetent individuals
(Vainrub B, Macareno H, Mandel S, et al: Wound zygomycosis
(mucormycosis) in otherwise healthy adults. Am J Med 1988; 84(3 Pt
1):546-8; abstract available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3348256). For example, 15
immunocompetent patients from India were described as having
necrotizing fasciitis due predominantly aseptate broad hyphae with
wide angle branching, consistent with the morphology of zygomyces
species; of the 8 cases cultured, 5 were positive for _Apophysomyces
elegans_, a member of the order _Mucorales_ (Jain D, Kumar Y, Vasishta
RK, et al: Zygomycotic necrotizing fasciitis in immunocompetent
patients: a series of 18 cases. Mod Pathol 2006; 19(9): 1221-6.
Available at:
http://www.nature.com/modpathol/journal/v19/n9/full/3800639a.html#tbl2).
Also, a man from Sri Lanka injured in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami
developed a necrotizing wound infection from which _A. elegans_ was
cultured; histology showed mucormycosis in excised wound tissue
(Andresen D, Donaldson A, Choo L, et al: Multifocal cutaneous
mucormycosis complicating polymicrobial wound infections in a tsunami
survivor from Sri Lanka. Lancet 2005; 365(9462): 876-8; Abstract
available at:
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(05)71046-1/fulltext).

"Similar infections due to _A. elegans_ have been described in an
American (Wang J, Harvey CM, Calhoun JH, et al: Systemic
_Apophysomyces elegans_ after trauma: case report and literature
review. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2002; 3(3): 283-9; abstract available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12542929) and a Colombian (Ruiz
CE, Arango M, Correa AL, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in an
immunocompetent patient caused by _Apophysomyces elegans_. Biomedica
2004; 24(3): 239-51; Spanish; abstract in English available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15551876) injured in car
accidents."

On the basis of genetic, physiological, and morphological data,
Alvarez et al described 3 _Apophysomyces_ species, _A. variabilis_,
_A. trapeziformis_, _A. ossiformis_, in addition to _A. elegans_
(Alvarez E, et al. Molecular phylogenetic diversity of the emerging
mucoralean fungus _Apophysomyces_: Proposal of three new species. Rev
Iberoam Micol. 2010;27:80-9). As noted by these authors, unlike other
members of _Mucorales_, _Apophysomyces_ species primarily infects
immunocompetent hosts and the infection typically follows traumatic
implantation of the agent.

Joplin is a city in southern Jasper County and northern Newton County
in the southwestern corner of the US state of Missouri
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joplin,_Missouri). The city's
population was 50 150 in 2010 and the surrounding Metropolitan
Statistical Area had an estimated population of 174 300 in 2001.
Jasper County Missouri Incorporated and Unincorporated areas of Joplin
can be seen in red at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Jasper_County_Missouri_Incorporated_and_Unincorporated_areas_Joplin_Highlighted.svg.
The state of Missouri can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map at
http://healthmap.org/r/0YZr. - Mod.ML]
See Also
Mucormycosis, fatal - USA: (MO) tornado-related 20110612.1789
2005
----
Mucormycosis - Australia ex tsunami areas (02): corr 20050202.0362
Mucormycosis - Australia ex tsunami areas 20050131.0338
Wound infections, tsunami-related - Asia (02) 20050112.0109
Wound infections, tsunami-related - Asia 20050110.0079
.................................................ml/ejp/dk
</body>
