<header id=039038>
Published Date: 2011-10-24 15:24:18 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Avian influenza (65): updated nomenclature
Archive Number: 20111024.3168
</header>
<body id=039038>
AVIAN INFLUENZA (65): UPDATED NOMENCLATURE
******************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 24 Oct 2011
Source: World Health Organisation (WHO), Surveillance and Monitoring
[edited]
http://www.who.int/influenza/gisrs_laboratory/h5n1_nomenclature/en/index.html


Updated unified nomenclature system for the highly pathogenic H5N1
avian influenza viruses
-----------------------------
Background and Objectives:
In recent years, a variety of different provisional names have been
used to refer to emerging lineages of the currently circulating highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 viruses. As a result,
discussion, comparison, and analysis of the various lineages proved
difficult.

Avian H5N1 viruses continue to spread, continue to infect animals and
humans, and continue to evolve and diversify. While most viral genes
have been replaced through reassortment yielding many different
genotypes, the specific H5 hemagglutinin (HA) gene identified in 1996,
remarkably, has remained present in all isolates. Therefore, this H5
HA provides a constant to which the evolving strains may be
effectively compared, and it was proposed to develop a standard clade
nomenclature system based upon the evolution of this H5 HA. This
nomenclature system would enable:

- a unified system to be developed to facilitate the interpretation of
sequence/surveillance data from different laboratories;

- the labeling of clades by geographical reference to be replaced by a
more representative system;

- the phylogenetic tree to be expanded in the future; and

- a starting point to be established to develop a more extensive
system in the near future that takes into consideration antigenic
variation and reassortment into multiple genotypes.

The Unified Nomenclature System and Virus Clades
-------------------------------------------
An international consultative group of scientists was convened by the
World Health Organization (WHO), the World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
Phylogenetic analysis was performed using a variety of approaches on
all of the publicly available H5 HA sequences that have evolved from
the A/goose/Guangdong/1996 H5N1 virus. The initial results showed that
the currently circulating H5N1 viruses could be effectively grouped
into numerous virus "clades" based on the phylogenetic
characterization and sequence homology of the HA gene [A clade is a
monophyletic group. - Mod.CP]. Based on criteria used to distinguish
various groups of the H5 hemagglutinin (HA) gene, the system has
formally identified 20 distinct clades of the virus since its
inception in early 2008 [1-2]. These clades are defined as meeting the
following 3 specific clade definition criteria developed by the
WHO/OIE/FAO H5N1 Evolution Working Group:

- sharing of a common (clade-defining) node in the phylogenetic tree;

- monophyletic grouping with a bootstrap value of 60 or over at the
clade-defining node (after 1000 neighbor-joining bootstrap
replicates); and

- average percentage pairwise nucleotide distances between and within
clades of over 1.5 percent and under 1.5 percent, respectively.

As the viruses within these clades continue to evolve, new sublineages
(potential H5N1 clades) periodically emerge. Once these sublineages
meet the same 3 specific clade definition criteria as the initial
clades (listed above), they are designated as separate clades.

- See the Conceptual Diagram of ongoing H5N1 evolution pdf, 109kb:
http://www.who.int/influenza/gisrs_laboratory/201101_h5n1evoconceptualdiagram.pdf.

These new clades are defined as 2nd, 3rd or 4th-order clades and
assigned a numerical "address" which links them to their original
clade using a hierarchical decimal numbering system. For example,
within the distinct clade 2.3, 3rd order clades meeting the clade
definition were designated as clades 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 and so on. More
recently, a new monophyletic clade was identified within clade 2.3.2
and assigned a 4th order designation as clade 2.3.2.1. This logical
hierarchal numbering system is objectively related to HA phylogeny,
and thus removes geographic designations (e.g., the lineage previously
referred to as "Fujian-likeâ€š" became 3rd order clade 2.3.4, while
the "Qinghai lineage" became 2nd order clade 2.2). The H5N1 Evolution
Working Group recommends that emerging sublineages of H5N1 not be
classified using the hierarchal decimal numbering system until that
sublineage has met all 3 of the above criteria for designation of a
clade. However, the working group fully encourages the designation of
newly emerging distinct sublineages of H5N1 virus by independent
investigators using alternative, interim, naming conventions (e.g.,
using letters).

Recent divergence of the highly pathogenic H5N1 hemagglutinin gene
------------------------------------
Surveillance for the continuing circulation of highly pathogenic avian
influenza A(H5N1) in poultry and wild birds in Asia, the Middle East,
Europe, and Africa has led to an increase in the number of sequences
available for analysis. The current analysis consisted of 2947 HA gene
sequences consisting of at least 1600 nucleotides, of which 1637
sequences (primarily from 2008-2010) were added since the previous
nomenclature update. Phylogenetic analysis of the neighbor-joining
tree generated from this data-set revealed that the addition of this
new sequence data resulted in the generation of one or more
monophyletic groups with high bootstrap support within each of the
currently circulating clades of H5N1. In addition, many of these
groups had long branch lengths separating them from the nearest node
in the tree, indicating further nucleotide divergence.

- See full tree figure pdf, 305kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/gisrs_laboratory/H5N1_full_tree.pdf.

Each of the currently circulating clades (1, 2.1.3, 2.2, 2.2.1, 2.3.2,
2.3.4 and 7) were then examined independently to measure the average
within-group pairwise nucleotide distances, and all were found to have
over 1.5 percent within-group divergence, indicating the need to split
these groups into new order clades. After generation of clade-specific
trees, monophyletic groups with bootstrap values over 60 were selected
and tested to determine the within- and between-group p-distances.
Based on the previously defined nomenclature, 12 new 2nd, 3rd, and
4th-order clades were identified.

Summary
-------
To summarize these findings and to confirm the consistency of clade
topology using a smaller dataset, a small tree containing 196 HA
sequences was generated using both NJ [Neighbor Joining] and Bayesian
methods. Both NJ bootstrap support and Bayesian posterior
probabilities (shown on top and bottom of each clade-defining node,
respectively) were calculated to demonstrate confidence in clade
assignments. This tree is annotated with the 12 new clades presented
here and displays older, non-circulating and putatively
non-circulating clades as collapsed nodes.

- See small tree figure pdf, 776kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/gisrs_laboratory/201101_h5smalltree.pdf.

The designation of 12 new H5N1 clades (in contrast with the previous
nomenclature update in which only one new clade was identified [2]) is
not surprising, considering the length of time since the last
nomenclature update and improved surveillance/reporting of viruses in
recent years, leading to an increasing number of sequences available
for analysis. Interestingly, the clades that had already diverged into
3rd-order groups in previous analyses required the largest number of
new clade designations. Previous assignment to 3rd-order clades
indicates that the viruses had already evolved considerably, usually
because of short generation times and large population sizes in
enzootic areas. In addition to the emergence of novel clades of H5N1,
a number of previously circulating clades of H5N1 have not been
detected for several years (since at least 2008). Although we cannot
rule out the possibility that the lack of detection of viruses in
these clades may in some cases be related to gaps in surveillance, it
is more likely that many of these clades have been supplanted by new
clades and become inactive. 13 clades (shown as collapsed nodes in the
small tree with the last year of detection shown in parentheses) have
not been detected since at least 2008 (0, 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.3.1, 2.3.3,
2.4, 2.6, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9).

As a consequence of HA gene diversification, the classification of
H5N1 viruses requires periodic updating, making classification dynamic
as the virus has expanded within several disparate ecosystems and
along distinct evolutionary trajectories. Although this report focuses
strictly on genetic divergence as a measure of H5N1 classification,
clearly additional studies related to H5N1 antigenicity and
cross-clade protective immunity are needed to better inform
pre-pandemic vaccine strain selection as well as risk management
policies for both veterinary and human health. As always, continued
surveillance for H5N1 in animals and humans is crucial for this
process to be most effective.

Updated trees and nucleotide alignments (as well as archived
trees/alignments for reference) are available on this website.

References
----------
(1) World Health Organization/World Organisation for Animal
Health/Food and Agriculture Organization H5N1 Evolution Working Group.
Toward a unified nomenclature system for highly pathogenic avian
influenza virus (H5N1). Emerg Infect Dis. 2008 Jul. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/7/e1.htm.

(2) World Health Organization/World Organisation for Animal
Health/Food and Agriculture Organization H5N1 Evolution Working Group.
2009. Letter to the Editor: Continuing progress towards a unified
nomenclature for the highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses:
divergence of clade 2.2 viruses. Influenza and Other Respiratory
Viruses 3(2)59-62. Available from
http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/122211969/HTMLSTART.

(3) World Health Organization/World Organisation for Animal
Health/Food and Agriculture Organization H5N1 Evolution Working Group.
2011. Letter to the Editor: Continued evolution of highly pathogenic
avian influenza A(H5N1): Updated nomenclature. Influenza and Other
Respiratory Viruses (in Press). Link will be posted when available

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[Interested readers should access the original document at the source
URL to view the phylogenetic trees accompanying the text, which are
essential for its comprehension.

This update is very welcome and instructive. The amount of sequence
data now available is remarkable and has allowed the definition of
some 13 clades, indicative of the rapid and extensive diversification
of the H5 avian influenza viruses. This analysis is restricted to the
HA-coding genome sub-unit and does not consider the role of variation
in the remaining 7 sub-units of the influenza virus genome or the
reassortment of these sub-units. Nonetheless, the haemagglutinin gene
data are likely to be directly related to the antigenic and virulence
properties of the H5 avian influenza viruses, although not necessarily
of direct relevance to their transmissibility to humans and/or
pathogenicity for mammals. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Avian influenza (64): vaccination & H5N1 virus evolution 20111016.3103
Avian influenza, human (58): H5N1 2.3.2.1 clade, WHO 20110902.2682
Avian influenza, human (59): transmission in mammals 20110926.2921
Avian influenza (56): mutation, vaccine efficacy, OIE 20110901.2678
Avian influenza, human (57): alert 20110829.2654
.................................................cp/msp/dk
</body>
