<header id=062583>
Published Date: 2011-07-30 17:19:07 EDT
Subject: PRO> Glanders, equine - Lebanon (02): (BA), RFI
Archive Number: 20110730.2295
</header>
<body id=062583>
GLANDERS, EQUINE - LEBANON (02): (BEIRUT), REQUEST FOR INFORMATION
******************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

******
[1]
Date: 29 Jul 2011
Source: The Daily Star (Beirut, Lebanon) [edited]
http://www.dailystar.com.lb/ArticlePrint.aspx?id=144886&mode=print


Authorities insist horse disease contained despite media reports of
spread
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite media reports that a disease is spreading through the
country's horse population, authorities involved with the issue say
there is no cause for alarm. 21 race horses have been put down
recently in measures designed to control the highly contagious
Glanders disease, but Agriculture Minister Hussein Hajj Hasan told The
Daily Star that the containment was "an ongoing process" and "we don't
need to create a panic."

Nabil Nasrallah, the director of the Society for the Protection and
Improvement of the Arabian Horse (SPARCA), also said he was "confident
that we have done everything" necessary to contain the disease. SPARCA
manages the Hippodrome horse-racing venue, which is owned by the
Beirut municipality.

Nasrallah told The Daily Star that Glanders symptoms were 1st
identified 3 months ago in 2 horses. He said he then requested the
assistance of the Agriculture Ministry and the World Organization for
Animal Health (OIE). Blood tests were performed on horses kept within
and near the Hippodrome stables, as well as in breeding areas in the
Bekaa Valley.

Hajj Hasan said the blood tests were carried out at laboratories in
Lebanon and Germany. According to Nasrallah, some 1000 horses were
originally tested and those horses whose test results were
"suspicious," if not necessarily positive, were destroyed in order to
prevent the risk of the disease spreading. SPARCA also implanted
microchips in the horses so that they can be tracked.

19 horses in addition to the original 2 were put down. This occurred
in 2 waves, the 1st a month ago and the most recent in the past week.
Nasrallah said there are around 450 horses in the stables in and
around Beirut's Hippodrome, but over 1000 total horses have been
tested so far. Hajj Hasan said that as testing is ongoing, the
possibility remains that more horses will be put down in the future if
necessary.

Glanders is a highly contagious disease that usually affects horses,
donkeys and mules, but can be transmitted to other animals. It tends
to be contracted through contaminated water but this is not its only
source. There is no vaccine for Glanders, and sick animals can
transmit the disease to humans.

The disease originated with 2 horses with a breeder in Damascus,
Nasrallah said, adding that the Agriculture Ministry has placed a
temporary ban on the importation of horses from Syria [see comment,
below]. In addition, as tests continue, horses from outside the
stables close to the Hippodrome will not be brought in from more
remote breeding areas.

Nasrallah stressed that "we didn't try to hide anything," and that the
Agriculture Ministry reported the suspicious Glanders symptoms to OIE
as soon as they were noticed. The OIE's website confirms this is the
"1st occurrence" of Glanders in the country, and that there have been
reports from the Agriculture Ministry on the issue since February
[2011].

Ghazi Yehia, the OIE's Middle East and North Africa regional
representative, said he could "confirm" that all measures that have
been implemented by the Agriculture Ministry are in compliance with
international standards."

[Byline: Annie Slemrod]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Sat 30 Jul 2011
Source: The Daily Star (Beirut) [edited]
http://www.dailystar.com.lb/News/Local-News/2011/Jul-30/New-committee-to-follow-up-on-horse-disease.ashx#axzz1TcjhMvoN


New committee to follow up on horse disease
-------------------------------------------
The Municipality of Beirut announced Friday [29 Jul 2011] the
formation of a joint health committee to follow up on a horse disease
that has been spreading through the country's horse population, the
National News Agency reported.

21 horses have been put down recently in measures designed to control
the highly contagious Glanders disease, but authorities involved with
the issue say there is no cause for alarm.

"A number of race-horses were infected with the Glanders disease and
all necessary measures to confront and address this issue were taken,
including destroying infected horses under the supervision of the
Agriculture Ministry," the municipality's council statement said.

The committee will release periodic follow-up reports on the issue,
the statement said.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[In view of the zoonotic nature of glanders, it may be assumed that
the Lebanese "joint committee" is composed of public health and animal
health agencies/experts: a "One Health" concept.

According to Lebanon's immediate notification to the OIE (solitary, so
far), dated 11 Jul 2011, the glanders outbreak had started on 14 Feb
2011, initially confirmed on 19 May 2011 (CF tests performed by the
OIE Reference Laboratory in Jena, Germany). Additional positive CF
tests of Lebanese samples were obtained in the same ref lab on 16 Jun
2011 and on 5 Jul 2011 (the latter was followed, 6 days later, by the
official notification). The reasons for the 2 additional tests,
preceding notification, is not known to us; clarification will be
appreciated.

According to the current media-derived information, the disease was
introduced into Lebanon by 2 horses imported from Syria. It is not
clear if the Syrian horses were accompanied, when transported to
Lebanon, by veterinary certificates and if testing for glanders was a
requirement. The total number of equidae in Syria is (OIE 2010
figures) 124 820 and in Lebanon (OIE 2008 figures) 2000.

According to Syria's reports to the OIE (2010), glanders has been
absent there since 1973.

For a 2009 paper which includes information on a glanders-positive
(C-ELISA, PCR) horse, reportedly originating from Syria, see
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2745380/.

A recent event in Switzerland, when glanders was suspected in imported
race horses (but eventually excluded), was characterised by a
similarly extended time-gap between animal movements and
sampling/testing dates. An interim conclusion: the veterinary control
upon international movements of race horses, worldwide, deserves to be
revisited. - Mod.AS

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for Beirut, Lebanon, is available
at:
http://healthmap.org/r/15Lk - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
Glanders, equine - Lebanon: (BA) OIE 20110713.2122
Glanders, equine - Switzerland (02): (SO) ex Lebanon, NOT 20110729.2282
Glanders, equine - Switzerland: (SO) ex Lebanon, RFI 20110724.2227
Glanders, equine - Bahrain: (North), OIE 20110430.1350
.................................................sb/arn/ejp/dk
</body>
