<header id=039163>
Published Date: 2011-11-24 09:20:40 EST
Subject: PRO> Tuberculosis, drug resistance - North Korea (03): comment, BCG coverage
Archive Number: 20111124.3440
</header>
<body id=039163>
TUBERCULOSIS, DRUG RESISTANCE - NORTH KOREA (03): COMMENT, BCG
COVERAGE
***********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 22 Nov 2011
From: Dr. Steve Berger [edited]
<mberger@post.tau.ac.il>


Re: ProMED-mail post Tuberculosis, drug resistance - North Korea (02):
background 20111116.338
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A recent posting in ProMED noted that rates of tuberculosis in North
Korea have been increasing at an alarming rate in recent years, in
spite of a parallel improvement in the uptake of BCG vaccine in that
country. Indeed, one of the oldest controversies in medicine concerns
the effectiveness of BCG vaccination to prevent tuberculosis. As of
2011, more than 85 percent of countries continue to routinely
vaccinate infants with BCG vaccine.

The following analysis was undertaken to collate concurrent trends in
tuberculosis rates and BCG vaccine uptake among countries that employ
the vaccine. Data for tuberculosis incidence were obtained from the
Gideon database (http://www.GideonOnline.com), which is largely
based on reporting from individual Health Ministry reports and
publications of the World Health Organization. Disease rates per 100
000 population are automatically generated by Gideon, and all charts
summarized in a related e-book. [1] Country-specific estimates of BCG
coverage were obtained from a WHO website:
http://apps.who.int/immunization_monitoring/en/globalsummary/timeseries/tscoveragebcg.htm,
and supplemented by individual reporting data at
http://www.who.int/countries/en/.

Individual charts were generated which plot tuberculosis rates and
estimates of vaccine uptake. [2] Charts were then collated into 3
categories:

A) Tuberculosis rates appear to diminish in parallel with high (>=85
percent) and / or increasing vaccine uptake (examples in graph A:
http://www.gideononline.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/TB-A4.png)

B) Tuberculosis rates appear to increase in parallel with high and /
or increasing vaccine uptake (examples in graph B:
http://www.gideononline.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/TB-B2.png)

C) No consistent similarity is apparent between trends in tuberculosis
rates and vaccine uptake (examples in graph C:
http://www.gideononline.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/TB-C2.png).

Graph C includes examples of countries (Latvia, Peru and India) in
which vaccine uptake was initially associated with increasing disease
rates, and subsequently decreasing rates; and others (Sri Lanka) in
which these effects were reversed.

No attempt was made to further examine these data using tests of
statistical significance, trend analysis, etc. In the following table,
assignment of individual countries is based simply on the existence of
overt visible trends between disease rates and vaccine uptake:
http://www.gideononline.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/TB-Table1.png.

Data presented in the table suggest that only 62 countries (36
percent) that employ BCG vaccination have demonstrated decreasing
tuberculosis rates in parallel with increased vaccine uptake; while,
49 countries (28 percent) have actually experienced increasing disease
rates despite adequate vaccine usage. There is no apparent
relationship between vaccination and disease rates in the remaining 63
countries (36 percent). Countries in which a paradoxical increase in
tuberculosis has paralleled expanded vaccine uptake are concentrated
in Africa, Asia and the Near East; while countries in which increasing
vaccine uptake is paralleled by decreased incidence are concentrated
in North Africa, the Middle East, Western Europe, Oceania and the
Americas region. These trends are depicted in the following map:
http://www.gideononline.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/TB-Global-Trend5.png.

The above analysis is not intended to imply a causal relationship
between tuberculosis incidence and vaccine uptake. In fact, any impact
of BCG vaccination on disease incidence might only become apparent
after several years, given the long "incubation period" associated
with reactivation tuberculosis. Additional factors which might impact
on the incidence of tuberculosis in many of these countries include
AIDS, malnutrition, crowding, civil conflict, drug resistance, nature
of laboratory facilities, and systems for case-finding, patient
isolation and follow-up.

References:
1. Berger SA. Tuberculosis: Global Status, 2011. 568 pages, 894
graphs, 1142 references. Gideon e-books,
http://www.gideononline.com/ebooks/disease/tuberculosis-global-status/.

2. Gideon graph tool tutorial at
http://www.GIDEONonline.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/Gideon-Graphs.pps.

--
Steve Berger
Geographic Medicine
Tel Aviv Medical Center
<mberger@post.tau.ac.il>

[ProMED-mail thanks Steve Berger for his commentary.

BCG, or Bacille Calmette-Guerin, is an attenuated strain of the bovine
tuberculosis bacillus, _Mycobacterium bovis_, developed for use as a
live bacterial vaccine to prevent tuberculosis (TB). BCG is also
highly protective against leprosy. In addition, it is used as an
immunostimulant in the treatment of superficial carcinoma of the
bladder. The vaccine was 1st administered to humans in 1921 and
remains the only vaccine against tuberculosis in general use.

Many persons born in countries with a high prevalence of TB have been
BCG-vaccinated in infancy. Although BCG vaccination does not prevent
initial infection, it does prevent dissemination to tuberculous
meningitis and miliary disease in childhood. Meta-analysis of BCG
vaccination prospective trials and case-control studies in infancy has
shown clear benefit of vaccination; Evidence suggested that BCG
efficacy may persist through 10 years after infant vaccination
(Colditz GA, Berkey CS, Mosteller F, Brewer TF, Wilson ME, Burdick E,
Fineberg HV. The efficacy of bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccination of
newborns and infants in the prevention of tuberculosis: meta-analyses
of the published literature. Pediatrics. 1995 Jul; 96(1 Pt 1):29-35).


However, vaccination with BCG is not recommended as a means to control
TB in the USA, because of the success of detection and treatment of
latent TB infection (LTBI) in reducing incidence of TB, the low risk
of infection with _Mycobacterium tuberculosis_ in the U.S. (e.g., in
2003, children aged <14 years accounted for 6.2 percent of reported TB
cases - http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5412a1.htm), the
variable effectiveness of the vaccine against adult pulmonary TB
(Colditz GA, Brewer TF, Berkey CS, et al. Efficacy of BCG vaccine in
the prevention of tuberculosis. Meta-analysis of the published
literature. JAMA 1994;271:698--702), and the vaccine's potential
interference with tuberculin skin test (TST) reactivity. TST has been
used to diagnose LTBI.

A marked decline in TB mortality in Europe occurred in the 19th
century, long before the introduction of BCG vaccination in 1921 or
anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy in the mid-20th century (Magill TP. The
Immunologist and the Evil Spirits J Immunol 1955; 74:1-8). This early
decline in TB mortality has been attributed in part to improvements in
low standards of living, overcrowded housing, and poor nutrition that
prevailed during the early Industrial Revolution. More recently
resurgence of TB in developed countries has been attributed to the HIV
epidemic and immigration from countries with high TB prevalence. TB
transmission in some countries has been facilitated in crowded
shelters for the homeless and prisons where people weakened by poor
nutrition, drug addiction, and alcoholism are exposed to TB. A
resurgence of TB occurred in Russia in the 1990s, during a period of
general health crisis following the break-up of the Soviet Union.
Assessment of any effect of BCG vaccine coverage on the incidence of
TB in developing countries is complicated by concurrent political
turmoil, conflict-induced internal displacement of people living in
crowded refugee camps and prisons, poverty, the HIV epidemic,
malnutrition, famine, and an underfunded, underdeveloped public health
sector. - Mod.ML]
See Also
Tuberculosis, drug resistance - North Korea (02): background 20111116.338
2010
----
Tuberculosis, children - UK: use of BCG vaccine 20100717.2386
.................................................ml/ejp/lm
</body>
