<header id=011649>
Published Date: 2011-06-12 10:05:21 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Mucormycosis, fatal - USA: (MO) tornado-related
Archive Number: 20110612.1789
</header>
<body id=011649>
MUCORMYCOSIS, FATAL - USA: (MISSOURI) TORNADO-RELATED
*****************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 9 Jun 2011
Source: Yahoo News [edited]
http://news.yahoo.com/s/ac/8612835_deadly_fungus_strikes_joplin_tornado_survivors_volunteers


The Greene County (Missouri) Health Department has issued a memo to
health care workers who are treating injured victims of May's [22 May
2011] deadly Joplin [Missouri] tornado, warning them that a powerful
fungus has infected patients' wounds.

The Springfield News-Leader reports as many as 9 cases have been
reported in tornado victims across the area in various hospitals. Once
the aggressive fungus -- [of the class] _Zygomycetes_ -- enter the
body, they cause the death of infected cells. 3 or 4 patients, who
otherwise would have survived their wounds, have died from [the fungal
infection].

If the fungus stays in a limb, like an arm or leg, some treatments
have necessitated amputation to save the patient. Others with wounds
near the head weren't so lucky -- as soon as brain tissue started
dying, it was too late to save the patient.

The National Institutes of Health says this rapid form of infection
most often occurs in patients with suppressed immune systems. One
study in 2009 noted a diabetes patient who died of the fungal
infection at age 48. Despite being treated early, the man's health
rapidly declined as the fungus spread through his lungs.

Infections spread through the blood and affects blood circulation. It
is unknown how many people may be suffering from infections, but the
problem doesn't stop with those injured by the tornado.

KYTV in Springfield reports those helping with cleanup efforts may
become scratched by nails or splinters and any fungus residue on those
objects may infect someone.

Anyone with diabetes should be extremely careful. The National
Institutes of Health lists severe symptoms of the infection: fever,
headache, sinus pain, and swelling. Complications that can arise from
these fungal infections include nerve damage, blindness, blood clots
to the brain and lungs, or even death in extreme cases.

Cases of the deadly fungal infection have shown up in massive
disasters before such as the 2004 tsunami off the coast of Indonesia.
Health officials in Greene County stated in their memo that this
particular infection is "invasive" and that aggressive treatment may
be needed "within 24 hours" of recurring symptoms.

Any patients suspected of having this infection have been told to
seek the guidance of a trauma surgeon or the infectious disease doctor
on call.

[Byline: William Browning]

--
Communicated by:
Lewis B Sckolnick
<info@runanywhere.com>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 10 Jun 2011
Source: 10News.com/San Diego News, CNN report [edited]
http://www.10news.com/news/28202507/detail.html


Officials said Friday [10 Jun 2011] that 8 people injured by the
devastating Joplin, Missouri tornado have contracted a rare fungal
infection, and 3 have died, The US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention is assisting state and local health officials, who are
investigating the cases.

All 3 individuals who died had serious injuries, as well as fungus,
Jasper County Coroner Rob Chappel said. One of the deaths was caused
by the infection, called mucormycosis, but the cause of death for the
other 2 victims has not been determined, he said. All 8 patients
sustained multiple injuries and secondary wound infections, according
to the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services. The
infection can occur when dirt, vegetation, or other material becomes
lodged under the skin.

The death toll from the May tornado stood at 151 on Friday [10 Jun
2011].

CDC researcher Dr Benjamin Park told CNN that in most cases, people
with weakened immune systems inhale [fungal] spores and develop sinus
or nasal infections that spread. The Joplin cases apparently are a
form of the severe infection that appears with soft-tissue injuries.

A [fungal] spore on the tip of a tree, for example, can pierce the
skin, Park said. The infection can progress a few weeks later and
cause significant damage to tissue, which can require hospitalization,
antibiotics, and even removal of the tissue.

Although this is a rare infection, it can have extremely serious
consequences, requiring prompt medical attention, Park said. Anyone in
the tornado area that is suffering wounds that are not healing should
seek prompt medical attention, he added.

Deep skin fungal infection does not spread from human to human,
Missouri officials said. No cases were attributed to air, food, or
water.

[Byline: Miriam Falco, Divina Mims]

--
Communicated by:
Denis Green
<legion@q-net.net.au>

******
[3]
Date: Fri 10 Jun 2011
Source: Los Angeles Times [edited]
http://www.latimes.com/health/la-he-joplin-fungus-20110611,0,5212890.story


Some survivors of last month's [May 2011] massive tornado that
destroyed much of Joplin, Missouri, are facing another indignity: an
outbreak of a rare but frequently lethal fungal infection. 8 people
have been confirmed to have the infection, known as mucormycosis, and
at least 3 of them have died, according to the Missouri Department of
Health and Senior Services. Health authorities fear other tornado
victims may also be infected without realizing it.

"People who have wounds that are not improving should seek medical
attention immediately," said Dr Benjamin Park, a medical officer in
the mycotic disease branch of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in Atlanta, which monitors outbreaks of fungal infections.

Mucormycosis, also known as zygomycosis, is a family of rare diseases
caused by several different fungi that live in soil. The most common
form occurs when fungal spores are inhaled. The organisms take root in
the sinuses, then spread to the lungs and throughout the body. It
typically strikes people with weakened immune systems, such as those
with cancer or diabetes, or who are on immune-suppressing medications
because they have had organ transplants.

The more unusual variant -- which has been affecting residents of
Joplin -- is the cutaneous form, in which fungal spores get under the
skin. Experts believe that the tornado's 200 mph [322 km/h] winds blew
contaminated dirt and debris directly into victims' skin, or that it
got into open wounds caused by flying debris. Symptoms include redness
or inflammation, swelling, tenderness or pain, heat in the area of the
wound, and fever.

Treatment for both types typically involves surgical removal of dead
tissue and intravenous infusion of the antifungal medication
amphotericin. An oral drug called posaconazole is also used.

The 1st cases were noticed by Dr Uwe Schmidt, an infectious diseases
specialist at Freeman Health System in Joplin. A week after the
tornado, he and other doctors observed 3 patients in the intensive
care unit with what looked like white, fluffy mold growing on the
surface of some of their wounds. The infections continued to spread
even though the doctors removed the diseased skin. But the infections
slowed when amphotericin was administered.

Schmidt said he ultimately observed 5 cases at Freeman, out of 1700
patients treated there after the 22 May 2011 twister.

"I was surprised," he said. "The so-called subcutaneous form of the
fungus is not very common. I have never seen it myself before, and to
suddenly see this cluster was quite striking."

He noted that all of the patients with the infections also suffered
from severe wounds, so doctors cannot say with certainty that the 3
deaths were due to the fungus. "But it was probably a contributing
factor in their demise," he said.

Pathologists at Freeman have confirmed the identity of the fungus in
one case, and samples from all of the patients have been sent to CDC
for further study.

Authorities emphasized that the infections do not spread from person
to person, and that none of the cases was attributed to food, air,
water, or admission to a hospital.

Including the 3 patients whose deaths may have been related to fungal
infections, a total of 151 deaths have now been linked to the
tornado.

[Byline: Thomas H Maugh II]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A multiple vortex tornado, with a maximum width in excess of 1 mile
(1.6 km), struck the city of Joplin, Missouri, USA at about 5:41 p.m.
CDT on Sun 22 May 2011
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_Joplin_tornado). The tornado
tracked eastward across the city, and then continued eastward across
Interstate 44 into rural portions of Jasper County; it ranks as one of
Missouri's deadliest tornadoes and is likely to be one of the
costliest. As of 9 Jun 2011 officials reported 151 deaths associated
with the tornado, with another killed during cleanup operations the
next day. More than 990 were reported injured. On 9 Jun 2011, it was
first reported that a rare fungal infection, zygomycosis, was noted to
cause at least 8 serious cases of wound infection among the injured
survivors.

Zygomycoses are infections caused by fungi of the class
_Zygomycetes_, comprised of the orders _Mucorales_ and
_Entomophthorales_. Mucormycosis is the name given to infections
caused by fungi of the order _Mucorales_ that includes organisms of
species _Rhizopus_, _Rhizomucor_, _Mucor_, and _Cunninghamella_. They
are quite ubiquitous in the environment, such as soil and decaying
vegetable matter. Although most individuals are exposed to these fungi
on a daily basis, usually only people with weakened immune systems
develop infection due to these organisms. Types of infections due to
these organisms include: infection of the sinuses that can spread to
the brain, most commonly seen in patients with poorly controlled
diabetes mellitus; and infection of the lungs. These organisms
characteristically are angioinvasive, often leading to thrombosis, to
infarction of involved tissues, and frequently to dissemination, and
the infections they cause have a rapid and often fatal clinical
course. The diagnosis of mucormycosis almost always requires
histopathologic evidence of fungal invasion of the tissues. Culturing
these organisms from an infected site is rarely sufficient to
establish the diagnosis because the fungus may colonize tissue without
causing infection and is a relatively frequent laboratory
contaminant.

Infection caused by the _Entomophthorales_ is most often encountered
in tropical areas of the world where the causative fungi have been
isolated from both soil and plant detritus (Perez, MT, Gomez, JA,
Procop GW, et al: Nasofacial entomophthoromycosis: a case report and
brief review. Infect Dis Clin Pract 2009; 17(1): 44-7; abstract
available at
http://journals.lww.com/infectdis/Abstract/2009/01000/Nasofacial_Entomophthoromycosis__A_Case_Report_and.12.aspx;
and Spellberg B, Edwards J Jr, Ibrahim A: Novel perspectives on
mucormycosis: pathophysiology, presentation, and management. Clin
Microbiol Rev 2005; 18(3): 556-69; available at
http://cmr.asm.org/cgi/content/full/18/3/556).

Additionally, necrotizing soft tissue infections caused by
_Mucorales_ have been described in immunocompetent individuals
(Vainrub B, Macareno H, Mandel S, et al: Wound zygomycosis
(mucormycosis) in otherwise healthy adults. Am J Med 1988; 84(3 Pt 1):
546-8; abstract available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3348256). For example, 15
immunocompetent patients from India were described as having
necrotizing fasciitis due predominantly aseptate broad hyphae with
wide angle branching, consistent with the morphology of zygomyces
species; of the 8 cases cultured, 5 were positive for _Apophysomyces
elegans_, a member of the order _Mucorales_ (Jain D, Kumar Y, Vasishta
RK, et al: Zygomycotic necrotizing fasciitis in immunocompetent
patients: a series of 18 cases. Mod Pathol 2006; 19(9): 1221-6;
available at
http://www.nature.com/modpathol/journal/v19/n9/full/3800639a.html#tbl2).
Also, a man from Sri Lanka injured in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami
developed a necrotizing wound infection from which _A. elegans_ was
cultured; histology showed mucormycosis in excised wound tissue
(Andresen D, Donaldson A, Choo L, et al: Multifocal cutaneous
mucormycosis complicating polymicrobial wound infections in a tsunami
survivor from Sri Lanka. Lancet 2005; 365(9462): 876-8; abstract
available at
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(05)71046-1/fulltext).
Similar infections due to _A. elegans_ have been described in an
American (Wang J, Harvey CM, Calhoun JH, et al: Systemic
_Apophysomyces elegans_ after trauma: case report and literature
review. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2002; 3(3): 283-9; abstract available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12542929) and a Colombian (Ruiz
CE, Arango M, Correa AL, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in an
immunocompetent patient caused by _Apophysomyces elegans_. Biomedica
2004; 24(3): 239-51; Spanish; abstract in English available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15551876) injured in car
accidents.

Joplin is a city in southern Jasper County and northern Newton County
in the southwestern corner of the US state of Missouri
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joplin,_Missouri). The city's
population was 50 150 in 2010 and the surrounding Metropolitan
Statistical Area had an estimated population of 174 300 in 2001.
Jasper County Missouri Incorporated and Unincorporated areas of Joplin
can be seen in red at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Jasper_County_Missouri_Incorporated_and_Unincorporated_areas_Joplin_Highlighted.svg.
The state of Missouri can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/0YZr. - Mod.ML]
See Also
2005
----
Mucormycosis - Australia ex tsunami areas (02): corr 20050202.0362
Mucormycosis - Australia ex tsunami areas 20050131.0338
Wound infections, tsunami-related - Asia (02) 20050112.0109
Wound infections, tsunami-related - Asia 20050110.0079
.................................................ml/mj/dk
</body>
