<header id=007205>
Published Date: 2011-07-30 14:03:17 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis C - UK: (England) Cumbria
Archive Number: 20110730.2293
</header>
<body id=007205>
HEPATITIS C - UNITED KINGDOM: (ENGLAND) CUMBRIA
***********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 30 Jul 2011
Source: News and Star [edited]
http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/over-2-000-cumbrians-have-deadly-hepatitis-c-1.863327?referrerPath=news/race_for_life


More than 2000 Cumbrians have deadly hepatitis C
------------------------------------------------
More than 2000 Cumbrians are living with the potentially-deadly
illness hepatitis C, latest figures show. Those at-risk are being
urged to get tested after it emerged the north west has the highest
number of cases in England. 6 pharmacies in the county now offer free
blood tests for both hepatitis B and C -- which affect the liver. They
are 100 times more infectious than HIV.

Latest figures, released to coincide with World Hepatitis Day, show
that more than 29 500 people in the region are now living with
hepatitis C [virus infection] -- but only one in 6 are aware. In
Cumbria there are 2052 people, among the biggest in the [north west]
region. The north west has had the highest number of diagnosed cases
across England since 1999. There has, however, been a decrease in the
number of young people, aged 15 to 24, being diagnosed.

Those who may be at risk are therefore being urged to get tested at
participating chemists [pharmacies] in Carlisle, Workington,
Whitehaven, Penrith, Ulverston or Barrow, who also offer special
counselling both before and after the test. People deemed to be 'at
risk' include those with a family member, partner or ex-partner who
has the infection, people who have had a blood transfusion or organ
transplant prior to 1992, tattooists, people who have had medical
treatment abroad, people who have shared needles, injecting drug users
and health staff.

Hepatitis B is an infection of the liver caused by a virus, killing
one million people across the globe each year. It is usually passed
from person to person through unprotected sex, sharing of needles or
by infected mothers during childbirth. Often people may not know they
are infected as the symptoms are similar to flu, such as headaches,
aches and pains, vomiting, weight loss, diarrhoea and jaundice.

Hepatitis C, on the other hand, is [caused by] a virus in the blood
which causes an infection of the liver, swelling and scarring. If left
untreated it can develop into more serious conditions such as liver
cancer. Again it is usually transmitted by sharing needles or
unprotected sex [probably only rarely - Mod.CP]. Although 13 000 new
cases of hepatitis C are discovered each year in the UK, around 100
000 people are thought to be undiagnosed. Often people experience no
symptoms in the first 6 months, but in the later stages can suffer
from digestive problems, extreme tiredness, nausea and vomiting,
fever, itching and headaches. However, there is good news as treatment
now available is effective against the virus in many cases.

The pharmacy scheme, in each local authority area, is a partnership
between NHS Cumbria and the Hepatitis C Trust. Those involved already
work with people who could be at risk, offering services such as
needle exchange and methadone pick-up. The test is a finger prick, dry
blood spot test. Samples are sent away for testing. Gareth Jones, one
of the pharmacists involved, said: "I'd encourage anyone who is
concerned to go along to one of the pharmacies offering this testing,
have a chat and take the test." Chemists involved are Joseph Cowper in
Penrith, Mirehouse Pharmacy in Whitehaven, and Boots branches in both
Carlisle and Workington.

[Byline: Pamela McGowan]

--
Communicated by:
HealthMap alerts via ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Cumbria is a non-metropolitan county in North West England. Cumbria's
largest settlement and county town is Carlisle. It consists of 6
districts, and in 2008 had a population of just under half a million.
Cumbria is one of the most sparsely populated counties in the United
Kingdom, with 73.4 people per km2 (190/sq mi). A map of Cumbria can be
accessed at http://www.visitcumbria.com/map-of-cumbria.htm.

According to the newly published Health Protection Agency Weekly
Report, Volume 5 No 30 http://www.hpa.org.uk/hpr more than an
estimated 216 000 people in the UK are chronically infected with
hepatitis C virus (HCV) -- according to data for 2010 contained in the
Hepatitis C in the UK: 2011 report, published on the HPA website to
coincide with the World Health Organisation's World Hepatitis Day on
28 Jul 2011. This is a concern, in particular because many of these
individuals remain undiagnosed. In England, an estimated 161 000 --
0.4 percent of the adult population -- are chronically infected,
according to this report. The estimated numbers chronically infected
in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are 39 000, 12 000 and 4000
respectively.

Interested readers should consult the main chapters of this report
which describe, in turn, diagnosis, prevention, treatment and
awareness-raising activities in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland. The final section presents consolidated data for the UK as a
whole -- including an assessment of the burden that HCV infection
presents on the UK health service: a number of sources of national
data are used to demonstrate that HCV-related hospital admissions,
transplants and deaths continue to rise. By 2020, for example, the
report estimates that more than 15 000 people in England will be
living with either HCV-related cirrhosis or liver cancer caused by
hepatitis C.

As in previous HPA reports on HCV, the high prevalence of infection in
particular groups was shown to be a key characteristic of the disease
in the UK: injecting drug users (IDUs) are at greatest risk of
acquiring infection and some minority ethnic populations also have
higher rates of infection than the white, UK-born population.

Because hepatitis C is usually asymptomatic in the early years of
infection, and consequently many individuals remain undiagnosed, a
variety of initiatives to increase public awareness of hepatitis C are
ongoing. These include campaigns directly addressed to the high-risk
groups themselves -- such as The Hepatitis C Trust's well-established
Get Tested! campaign -- and education programmes for health care
professionals. These include: an e-learning package in Northern
Ireland; a Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP) Certificate
in the Detection and Diagnosis of Hepatitis C in Primary Care in
England; and a Train the Trainer course on blood-borne viruses (BBVs)
in Wales aimed at individuals from across a range of social, health
and other contexts working with individuals at risk of BBV infection.

Diagnosis and testing: There was a significant increase in new,
laboratory-confirmed HCV diagnoses in Scotland in 2010, the report
notes, whereas in the rest of the UK, laboratory reports -- albeit
known to under-estimate the true levels of diagnosis -- suggest a fall
in the numbers diagnosed over the past year. Although diagnosis by
general practitioners (GPs) in Scotland declined in 2010, despite the
launch of professional and public awareness campaigns earlier that
year, this was more than offset by the increase in diagnosis in drug
treatment/harm reduction settings. When data from enhanced
surveillance systems are taken together, testing patterns and
self-reports both suggest that HCV testing among IDUs in England is
increasing, as is testing via primary care and among individuals of
South Asian origin, suggesting increased awareness of HCV across all
these groups and settings.

Even though integrated drug treatment has been further rolled out
across the English prison population, the HPA data do not support an
increase in testing in English prisons over the past year.

Roll out of the recently available technique of dried blood spot (DBS)
testing -- which has contributed to increased levels of testing in
IDUs in England, Scotland and Wales -- has been pilot-tested in
Northern Ireland and is being rolled out across the prison population
in Wales.

Burden of HCV-related disease on health services: Although HCV is a
chronic infection, antiviral treatments are available that will
successfully clear the virus in the majority of patients. However,
unless a significant increase in those receiving effective treatment
occurs, the future burden of HCV-related disease will be substantial,
the HPA report concludes. All national data sources (hospital
admissions for HCV-related end-stage liver disease, liver transplants
and deaths) show that HCV-related liver disease is continuing to rise
and it is predicted that in 2020, 15 840 individuals will be living
with HCV-related cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma in England
alone. This is illustrated in the report's final section by reference
to recent trends in HCV related hospital admissions (figure 1),
transplants and deaths.

Readers should access the original text via the source URL to view
this information and the relevant references. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Hepatitis C - Ukraine (02) 20110302.0683
Hepatitis C - Ukraine 20110302.0679
.................................................sb/cp/ejp/dk
</body>
