<header id=051500>
Published Date: 2011-08-26 16:59:28 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ)
Archive Number: 20110826.2601
</header>
<body id=051500>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (02): (NEW JERSEY)
***************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 21 Aug 2011
Source: My Central Jersey [edited]
http://www.mycentraljersey.com/article/20110820/NJSPORTS/308200022/Old-disease-suspected-of-killing-deer-again?


EHD suspected of killing deer again
-----------------------------------
An old disease is suspected of moving north again to kill New Jersey
deer. The Division of Fish and Wildlife last week [15-19 Aug 2011] was
seeking fresh tissue samples from dead deer to be tested for EHD
(epizootic hemorrhagic disease) after hunters preparing for next
month's bow hunting deer season began finding dead deer in the woods
near water.

EHD has been in the U.S. since 1890, and Serotype 1 was 1st seen in
our state in 1955. Deer that survived Type 1 would not be immune to
Serotype 2. Both types are deadly to 25 percent of deer infected with
it, usually in August and September, and it does not affect humans.

The disease used to be confined pretty much to the southwestern part
of the state. It killed at least 80 deer in Salem County last year,
and has hit deer as far north as Morris County. EHD used to occur in
10-year cycles but, like our "100-year floods," now occurs more
frequently.

This year, hunters reported finding dead deer in the Hopewell-East
Amwell-Hillsborough-Neshanic area. Outbreaks are caused by the density
and distribution of the midges (tiny flies) that carry EHD, not by the
density of the deer herd. Deer that have the disease lose their fear
of humans, have redness around their eyes, drool and either die or
recover within 7 days. Those with the disease seek water to cool the
fever caused by the virus.

"We're continuing to monitor the situation and will send samples to
the lab," Division supervising biologist Carole Stanko said last week.
"The problem was getting samples within 24 hours after the deer died,
and we got a lot of reports about deer and we found they had been dead
too long, roadkills, even piles of bones.

"It's most likely that deer have been killed by EHD," she said. "We're
interested in seeing if it's Sero 2, which could be worse than Sero
1." Wind patterns have carried midges with EHD to deer as far north as
Michigan and British Columbia, and last year Dr. Doug Roscoe, the
Division's since-retired head pathologist, said weather patterns last
year might have carried the midges further north in our state. Cold
weather kills them.

[Byline: Jim Stabile]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) is an acute, infectious, often
fatal viral disease of some wild ruminants. This malady, characterized
by extensive hemorrhages, has been responsible for significant
epizootics in deer in the northern United States and southern Canada.
A similar hemorrhagic disease called bluetongue also occurs throughout
the U.S. and Canada. The 2 diseases are antigenically different.

Since 1890, deer die-offs from diseases which might have been EHD have
occurred in various parts of North America. These early die-offs were
variously diagnosed as blackleg, blacktongue, bluetongue, mycotic
stomatitis or hemorrhagic septicemia or they were undetermined. The
causative agents were never confirmed. A review of the case histories,
signs and lesions, seasonal occurrence, and lack of a bacterial agent
suggests that they might have been EHD.

The 1st occurrence and subsequent identification of EHD occurred in
1955 when several hundred white-tailed deer (_Odocoileus virginianus_)
succumbed in both New Jersey and in Michigan. It was considered a new
disease of deer and the name `epizootic hemorrhagic disease' was
suggested to describe its main clinical and pathological features.

Since these initial confirmed outbreaks of EHD, documented epizootics
have occurred in white-tailed deer in South Dakota, North Dakota,
Wyoming and Alberta, Canada. Suspected EHD outbreaks have occurred in
Missouri, Washington, Nebraska, Iowa and British Columbia. South
Dakota, Missouri and Nebraska have experienced periodic outbreaks of
EHD and the disease might be considered enzootic in these areas.

Since the initial 1955 outbreak, this malady has occurred primarily
among white-tailed deer, although occasionally mule deer (_O.
hemionusi_) and pronghorn antelope (_Antilocapra Americana_) have
succumbed.

The mode of transmission of EHD in nature is via a _Culicoides_ biting
fly or midge. _Culicoides variipennis_is the most commonly
incriminated vector in North America. A common observation in
outbreaks involving large numbers of deer -- as in Michigan, New
Jersey and Alberta (in the past) -- is that they are single
epizootics which do not recur. Die-offs involving small numbers of
deer -- as experienced in South Dakota and Nebraska -- occur almost
annually, and the disease appears to be enzootic in these areas. All
documented outbreaks of EHD have occurred during late summer and early
fall (August-October) and have ceased abruptly with the onset of
frost.

Experimentally, the disease can be transmitted to susceptible deer by
the inoculation of virus-laden material from infected deer by
subcutaneous, intramuscular, intravenous or oral routes.

Clinical signs of EHD and bluetongue are very similar. White-tailed
deer develop signs of illness about 7 days after exposure. A constant
characteristic of the disease is its sudden onset. Deer initially lose
their appetite and fear of man, grow progressively weaker, often
salivate excessively, develop a rapid pulse and respiration rate, and
fever (affected animals frequent bodies of water to lie in to reduce
their body temperature) and finally become unconscious. Hemorrhage and
lack of oxygen in the blood results in a blue appearance of the oral
mucosa, hence the name 'bluetongue.' Eight to 36 hours following the
onset of observable signs, deer pass into a shock-like state, become
prostrate and die.

Because of its very high mortality rate, EHD can have a significant
effect upon the deer population in a given area, reducing numbers
drastically. Hemorrhagic disease can be transmitted to other wild
ruminants. The EHD virus can infect domestic animals but rarely causes
disease.

EHD has not been shown to harm humans.

Portions of this comments are excerpts of:
http://www.michigan.gov/dnr/0,1607,7-153-10370_12150-26647--,00.html
- Mod.TG

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for New Jersey is available at:
http://healthmap.org/r/09FW - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
2010
----
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (04): (NJ) 20101022.3823
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (03): (MI) 20101001.3565
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (02): (MT) 20100923.3433
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, bovine - Guadeloupe: OIE 20100904.3175
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA: (IL) 20100819.2880
.................................................sb/tg/ejp/dk
</body>
