<header id=059852>
Published Date: 2011-04-04 11:51:02 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed debilitating illness - China: RFI
Archive Number: 20110404.1051
</header>
<body id=059852>
UNDIAGNOSED DEBILITATING ILLNESS - CHINA: REQUEST FOR INFORMATION
*****************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 2 Apr 2011
Source: The Epoch Times [abbreviated & edited]
http://www.theepochtimes.com/n2/china/highly-contagious-aids-like-disease-spreading-in-china-53864.html


A highly contagious AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]-like
disease is spreading in China. However, HIV [human immunodeficiency
virus] tests come up negative. In a small hotel across from the
Beijing Center for Disease Control and Prevention, a reporter from New
Express Daily, dressed in an isolation suit, interviewed a dozen
"unusual" patients from different areas of China. Their symptoms are
painful and debilitating and AIDS-like, but repeated tests for HIV
have come up negative.

One of the patients interviewed in the 24 Mar 2011 issue of New
Express Daily report, said he used to be chubby, but now he is skin
and bones, and his joints have become all deformed. In 2008, his
mother received a blood transfusion at a hospital. Afterwards, she
experienced frequent night sweats, numb limbs, aches all over,
creaking joints, rashes on her hands, and weight loss.

In May of that year [2008], this patient accidentally became infected
through contact with his mother's blood. 14 days later, he fell ill
with swollen lymph nodes on his neck, sore knees that made clicking
sounds, and pain all over his body. He also started vomiting after
every meal, and the left side of his face swelled up. In half a year,
his weight dropped from 82 kilograms (181 lbs) to 52 kilograms (115
lbs). Three months later, his wife and child developed the same
symptoms.

He said he went to every major hospital in Shanghai but could not get
a definite diagnosis. He has taken the HIV test 8 times, and each time
the test turned out negative. Then he found an Internet blog called
"The Negative Group," which he learned stands for "HIV negative." He
realized that people like himself were all writing on this blog with
the same kinds of symptoms, desperate to find a cure.

Several Chinese media have recently reported that the Department of
Health of Guangdong Province has confirmed that people in Beijing,
Shanghai, and Guangdong have fallen ill after being infected with an
unknown virus. The patients think they have AIDS, but they test
negative for HIV.

Guangdong has organized clinical experts, epidemiologists and
psychologists to work together on these cases. The Health Ministry has
also selected 6 provinces with more patients, including Beijing,
Shanghai, Zhejiang, Hunan, Jiangsu and Guangdong, to conduct
epidemiological studies, but there are no results yet, the reports
said.

In most of the 30 cases investigated by New Express Daily for its 24
Mar 2011 report, people said their relatives and friends are also
infected. Most of the 30 patients were infected through sexual
contact. Some experts diagnosed them as having AIDS phobia.

However, the disease seems to be highly contagious and can spread by
contact via any bodily fluid, through kissing, shared utensils, sweat,
and even protected sex. Once infected, the immune system appears to be
attacked, which results in a decrease of white blood cells and the
body's ability to defend against infectious disease and foreign
materials.

In the past, official health agencies have only conducted HIV tests
on these patients and have not checked for other, similarly
pathological viruses. With HIV results coming up negative, many
patients then stopped taking protective measures with their relatives.
Subsequently, all their relatives and friends were infected, many have
said.

[byline: Chen Yilian]

--
communicated by:
an anonymous contributor

[The description of the signs and symptoms of this illness (or group
of illnesses) is not given in sufficient detail to suggest a precise
identification. The illness, if indeed it is a single entity, appears
to be widespread in China and transmitted by both blood transfusion
and sexual routes, but is not HIV-related. It may be an immune
deficiency syndrome, but evidence is lacking. ProMED-mail would
welcome further information on this condition from any informed
source.

It should be noted that, according to Wikipedia, The Epoch Times,
which is the source of this report, was founded in 1999 by supporters
of the Falun Gong spiritual discipline and is heavily critical of the
Chinese Communist Party and policies of the Chinese government. -
Mod.CP]

.................................................cp/msp
</body>
