<header id=002525>
Published Date: 2011-07-22 20:17:27 EDT
Subject: PRO> Influenza (45): vaccine & narcolepsy
Archive Number: 20110723.2210
</header>
<body id=002525>
INFLUENZA (45): VACCINE AND NARCOLEPSY
**************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 21 Jul 2011
Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy) News
[edited]
http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/cidrap/content/influenza/swineflu/news/jul2111narco.html


Narcolepsy review restricts Pandemrix use in kids, teens
--------------------------------------------------------
Europe's drug regulatory agency today [21 Jul 2011] released its
final review of a link between narcolepsy and the Pandemrix 2009 H1N1
vaccine, which recommends a labeling change that limits the vaccine's
use in children and teens to when protection is needed and seasonal
trivalent vaccine isn't available. Some countries, primarily
Scandinavian ones, have reported link between the vaccine and
narcolepsy in young people. Pandemrix, made by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK),
is one of the 2009 H1N1 vaccine used in Europe during the pandemic,
and it's unclear how many doses are still on the market. It contains
the AS03 adjuvant.

The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said today in a press release
that its Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP),
however, has confirmed that the vaccine's overall risk-benefit balance
is positive. The agency said in the release that "in persons under 20
years of age Pandemrix may only be used if the recommended seasonal
trivalent influenza vaccine is not available and if immunisation
against H1N1 is still needed (such as, in persons at risk of the
complications of infection)."

The CHMP launched a review of the vaccine-narcolepsy in August 2010,
based on a request from the European Commission. Today's labeling
change recommendation follows an interim one in April 2011 asking GSK
to warn about the risk in young people and advise healthcare providers
to perform an individual benefit-risk assessment before administering
Pandemrix.

In making its recommendation today, the EMA said it took into
consideration epidemiologic studies conducted in Finland and Sweden,
safety and surveillance data from several other EU countries, and
preliminary findings from an 8-country study coordinated by European
Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). It also incorporated
feedback from an expert meeting that discussed that link.

The EMA said the Finnish and Swedish studies were well designed,
showing a 6- to 13-fold increase risk of narcolepsy in young people
who had received the Pandemrix vaccine. It added that link has not
been found in adults 20 and older.

Though the preliminary ECDC findings confirmed the narcolepsy link in
Finland, the EMA cautioned about extrapolating the findings to other
countries, especially ones where vaccination coverage with Pandemrix
was lower.

The vaccine likely interacted with genetic or environmental factors
that could boost the risk of narcolepsy, the EMA said, adding that
several studies in the European Union are under way to explore other
possible connections.

"Exposure to specific infectious diseases (including H1N1) at
different ages, particularly upper respiratory infections, may have
contributed to the observations in the Nordic area," the EMA said,
adding that more research is needed to address such possibilities.

GSK said in a statement today that the labeling change will replace
the advisory to clinicians that the EMA recommended in April 2011. The
company said it would continue to work closely with the EMA and other
regulators to explore the possible link. It added that final results
from the ECDC study and an epidemiological study that it is conducting
in Canada are needed to shed more light on narcolepsy cases in people
who received Pandemrix. The company also said it will conduct more
research on the possible link and include input from independent
experts, per an agreement with the EMA.

So far 31 million doses of Pandemrix have been administered in 47
countries, GSK said. It has received 335 reports as of 6 Jul 2011 of
narcolepsy in people who were immunized with Pandemrix, of which 68
percent were from Finland and Sweden.

[Byline: Lisa Schnirring]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Narcolepsy is a rare illness, with around 10 new cases per million
people every year. The main symptom is falling asleep suddenly. About
4 out of 5 people with narcolepsy also experience cataplexy, a sudden
loss of muscular tone and control which is usually triggered by
emotion, for example laughter. It may cause the jaw to drop and the
head to slump, or the legs to collapse. These attacks can last for
seconds or many minutes and can occur many times a day.

Other possible symptoms include temporary paralysis on falling asleep
or waking up and visual hallucinations. People may wake during the
night with their heart racing, feeling flushed and agitated, and with
intense cravings for sweets. Schoolchildren with narcolepsy may become
the focus of ridicule and bullying in school and it becomes difficult
for them to engage in usual school activities and study.

Narcolepsy appears to be a condition where normal elements of sleep
-- specifically elements of REM (rapid eye movement) or dream sleep
suddenly occur during a person's wakeful state. The cause of
narcolepsy remains unclear. Research has identified several different
factors which may play a part. Some people may be predisposed to the
condition by their genetics -- it is much more common among people
with certain genetic profiles. There may be abnormal functioning of
certain neurotransmitters -- for example research has identified that
it may be caused by a shortage of the chemical brain messenger called
hypocretin. Meanwhile other research suggests that narcolepsy may be
the result of an autoimmune process, when the body attacks itself.

Suggested initial triggers include infections such as measles or
mumps, accidents, and the hormonal changes that take place in puberty
(because for many people affected, narcolepsy begins in adolescence).

Overall, Pandemrix has been given to more than 31 million people
worldwide. A spokesperson for the UK's drug regulator, the Medicines
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said: "The annual
seasonal flu vaccines have not been associated with the development of
narcolepsy, and there are no new safety concerns associated with these
vaccines." These vaccines remain recommended for protection against
seasonal influenza." She added: "The MHRA has been fully involved in
the European safety review of Pandemrix vaccine. It is possible that
other geographical factors in Sweden and Finland, at the time of the
pandemic, have contributed to the cases of narcolepsy seen after
vaccination with Pandemrix. These factors remain unknown, and further
studies are ongoing to explore this. The regulatory action for
Pandemrix vaccines recognises the potential seriousness of H1N1
infection and ensures that the vaccine remains a licensed alternative
to protect children and adolescents in need of protection against
H1N1, if seasonal vaccines are not available." [Information extracted
from the BBC News Health website
(http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-14239823) and other sources. -
Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza (12): narcolepsy and vaccination 20110210.0463
2010
----
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) (66): Sweden, no vaccine narcolepsy link 20100914.3322
.................................................cp/mj/lm
</body>
