<header id=052749>
Published Date: 2011-08-04 13:00:06 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Bagaza virus, wild birds - Spain: (AN) 2010
Archive Number: 20110804.2354
</header>
<body id=052749>
BAGAZA VIRUS, WILD BIRDS - SPAIN: (ANDALUSIA) 2010
**************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: August 2011
Source: Emerging Infectious Diseases [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/17/8/110077.htm#cit


[The following is a report of the occurrence of Bagaza virus in
partridges and pheasants in Spain, 2010. The full article including
references is available at the source URL above.]

Ref: Aguero M, Fernandez-Pinero J, Buitrago D, et al: Bagaza virus in
partridges and pheasants, Spain, 2010. Emerg Inf Dis 17(8): 1498-501]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract
--------
In September 2010, an unusually high number of wild birds (partridges
and pheasants) died in Cadiz [Andalusia] in southwestern Spain.
Reverse transcription PCR and virus isolation detected flavivirus
infections. Complete nucleotide sequence analysis identified Bagaza
virus, a flavivirus with a known distribution that includes
sub-Saharan Africa and India, as the causative agent.

Background
----------
We report an outbreak of disease in wild birds (partridges and
pheasants) in Spain that was caused by a flavivirus, Bagaza virus
(BAGV). This virus was first isolated in Bagaza, Central African
Republic, in 1966, from a pool of mixed-species female _Culex_ spp.
mosquitoes. It has subsequently been found in mosquitoes in other
countries in western Africa and in India, where serologic evidence
suggests that this virus may infect humans, although its pathogenicity
in humans is uncertain. BAGV has been shown to be synonymous with
Israel turkey meningoencephalitis virus, a pathogen affecting poultry
(turkeys) and reported only in Israel and South Africa.

Clinical signs
--------------
In September 2010, an unusually high number of red-legged partridges
(_Alectoris rufa_) died on several hunting properties in southwestern
Cadiz, the southernmost province in Andalusia, Spain. Clinical signs
included weakness, prostration, lack of motor coordination, weight
loss and white diarrhea. Some common pheasants (_Phasianus colchicus_)
were also affected. These findings coincided in time with the 1st
cases of West Nile virus (WNV) infection in horses detected in Spain.

Results
-------
Sequence of BAGV from Spain was closely related to the 2 unique
full-length BAGV sequences available in GenBank and showed greater
similarity with the strain from Africa (94.1 percent nt identity) than
with the strain from India (92.8 percent nt identity). Genetic
relatedness between all 3 viruses was high (higher than 92 percent),
which indicates that they belong to the same _Flavivirus_ species
(Bagaza virus). The tree based on the E region grouped Israel turkey
meningoencephalitis virus and BAGV within the same cluster and showed
that both viruses are closely related to Ntaya virus.

Conclusions
-----------
BAGV has been detected and isolated in Cadiz, Spain. It appeared to
seriously affect partridges and, to a lesser extent, pheasants, and
caused an unusually high number of deaths in these birds. No signs of
infection and no deaths were observed for other bird species. However,
whether other bird species are susceptible to disease caused by BAGV
should be determined because this virus is similar to Israel turkey
meningoencephalitis virus, a relevant pathogen for turkeys. Also,
other vertebrates could be at risk for infection with this virus.
Thus, experimental studies on the pathogenicity of this virus in
specific vertebrates should be conducted.

--
Communicated by:
HealthMap Alerts via ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This is the 1st ProMED report of Bagaza virus. In response to this
outbreak, the 3 Aug 2011 edition of La Voz Digital
(http://www.lavozdigital.es/agencias/20110803/cadiz/junta-determina-virus-bagaza-como_201108031212.html;
in Spanish, trans Mod.TY) indicated that an Environmental Delegation
of the Andalusia government in Cadiz reported that the deaths of
partridges and pheasants in 11 hunting clubs was due to Bagaza virus
transmitted by _Culex_ mosquitoes. The report stated that the virus
was from Africa, imported into Spain for the 1st time by migratory
wild birds or by illegal importation of infected exotic birds for
commercial purposes.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map showing the location of Cadiz
can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/16hw. - Mod.TY]

[Red-legged partridge (_Alectoris rufa_):
http://www.bobperryonline.co.uk/mediac/400_0/media/DIR_29459/RedLeggedPartridge8.jpg
- Mod.JW]
See Also
Encephalitis - Greece (11): (MC) WNV, comment 20100826.3022
.................................................sb/jw/ty/mj/jw
</body>
