<header id=036797>
Published Date: 2011-12-04 15:14:26 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Brucella vaccine adverse reactions, human - Russia: (Buryatia)
Archive Number: 20111204.3534
</header>
<body id=036797>
BRUCELLA VACCINE ADVERSE REACTIONS, HUMAN - RUSSIA: (BURYATIA)
***************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 1 Dec 2011
Source: NewsRU [edited]
http://www.newsru.com/russia/01dec2011/brucella.html


More than 50 meat-processing plant workers in the town of Mykolayiv
region of Buryatia Tarbagatai sought medical help after the company
required them to be vaccinated against brucellosis, 6 of them were
hospitalized, reports RIA "Novosti" with reference to the Republican
administration.

At the same time Life News reports that 52 employees entered the plant
with a vaccine strain of brucellosis, a dose which was exceeded
several times. The very next day, workers began to turn to doctors
complaining of feeling unwell and fever. All were hospitalized in the
infectious diseases hospital, the newspaper writes.

Employees Rospotrebnadzor for Buryatia has found that a rural
paramedic vaccinated slaughterhouse workers against brucellosis in
violation of the essential requirements. "The management has purchased
the vaccine without the consent of the district hospital. Also, CRH
has not concluded contracts for carrying out vaccination," added the
department. Proceedings of Inquiry have been sent to the prosecutor's
office in Buryatia, writes "Rossiyskaya Gazeta".

Immunization against brucellosis was held in the "Eco-Food" company in
the village of Nikolaevsk on 23 November. According to Life News, the
manual mill is not authorized [to use?] the vaccine in an accelerated
mode to obtain permission from the Rosselkhoznadzor [for] purchase of
imported meat.

These inoculations were made illegally, stressed the chief
epidemiologist of the Ministry of Health of the Republic, Kolmakova
Victoria. Now the victims complain of large blisters on their hands,
talk about high blood pressure and pain in the liver Similar symptoms
appeared in all 52 inoculated plant workers.

To date, 6 patients were hospitalized with postvaccinal reaction -
temperature and presence at the site of vaccination infiltration, says
the Republican Rospotrebnadzor. "The dynamics of patients and
vaccinated individuals are not getting worse," the prognosis for life
and health-friendly, noted the department." All the victims will be
under the scrutiny of physicians until January [2012], [according to]
the website of TV "Tivikom".

--
Sabine Zentis
Gut Laach
Nideggen, Germany
<www.cvlonghorns.de>

*****
[2]
Date: Fri 2 Dec 2011
Source: RIA [edited]
http://www.ria.ru/incidents/20111202/504404987.html


The number of hospitalizations after vaccination against brucellosis
in Buryatia has risen to 15 people. By Friday, 2 Dec 2011, doctors had
hospitalized 9 [more] employees of meat processing enterprises, who
felt ill after an overdose of brucellosis vaccination, according to
RIA Novosti from a representative of the Republican Rospotrebnadzor.

Immunization against brucellosis was held in the "Eco-Food" company in
the village of Nikolaevsk Tarbagatai district on 23 November 2011. The
very next day, workers began to turn to doctors complaining of feeling
unwell with fever. 52 workers received the vaccine, of which 51 fell
ill. Infectious disease specialists, immunologists and sanitary
inspectors felt the illness to be a post-immunization reaction to the
vaccine against brucellosis.

--
Sabine Zentis
Gut Laach
Nideggen, Germany
<www.cvlonghorns.de>

[ProMED thanks Sabine Zentis for contributing these reports.

The following was abstracted from Cieslak TJ, Christopher CW,
Kortepeter MG, et al: Immunization against potential biological
warfare agents. Clin Infect Dis. 2000; 30: 843-850 (using the original
reference numbering:

The causative agents of brucellosis are categorized as incapacitating
agents, with infections by aerosol likely to produce large numbers of
casualties but little mortality. Nevertheless, brucellosis deserves
consideration by defense planners because of its extraordinary
infectivity. In fact, in its era of offensive biological warfare
research in the 1950s, the United States chose _Brucella suis_ as the
first agent to be produced at the newly constructed Pine Bluff Arsenal
in Arkansas [37].

Veterinary vaccines that have significant efficacy against brucellosis
have been studied and employed. The vaccination of livestock to reduce
enzootic disease load, in combination with the slaughter of infected
animals, is largely responsible for the declining incidence of human
brucellosis. In the USA, the decline of human brucellosis cases
reported to the CDC has paralleled the control of infections due to
_B. abortus_ in cattle [38]. Most veterinary vaccines in use today
derive from _B. abortus_ strain 19, an attenuated organism with stable
virulence, or from Rev 1, a live, virulence-stable _B. melitensis_
strain. A review of the role of brucellosis vaccination in veterinary
medicine has been published [39].

No licensed human vaccine against brucellosis is available in most of
the Western world, including the USA, although live Brucella vaccines
have been employed at various times in many developing nations [40].
Most preparations were derived from _B. abortus_ strain 19, reflecting
the cross-immunity among Brucella species and diminished human
virulence of _B. abortus_ when compared with other species.
Nonetheless, administration of either live preparation to humans is
hampered by a modest but notable incidence of clinical brucellosis
cases, as well as by significant hypersensitivity reactions. Such
problems were noted in the former Soviet Union, where human
vaccination is still widely employed, and in a US trial of strain 19
and Rev 1 vaccines conducted 35 years ago [41].


37. US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases. US Army
activity in the US biological warfare programs 1977 February
24;I:4-1.
38. Young EJ: An overview of human brucellosis. Clin Infect Dis
1995;21: 283-90.
39. Nicoletti P. Immune responses and vaccination. In: Madkour MM,
editor. Brucellosis. London: Butterworths; 1989. p. 263-269.
40. Roux J: Brucella vaccines in humans. In: Madkour MM, editor.
Brucellosis. London: Butterworths; 1989. p. 244-249.
41. Spink WW, Hall JW, Finstad J, Mallet E: Immunization with viable
Brucella organisms. Bull World Health Organ 1962;26:409-419.

It seems clear that the relatively rapid onset of symptoms were due to
a hypersensitivity reaction related to the vaccine, presumably one of
the vaccines mentioned above. Whether a higher dose of the vaccine
contributed to the issue is unclear. - Mod. LL

]

.................................................ll/JW
</body>
