<header id=027549>
Published Date: 2007-04-27 19:00:01 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Contaminated pet food - USA, Canada, Mexico (03): swine
Archive Number: 20070427.1380
</header>
<body id=027549>
CONTAMINATED PET FOOD - USA, CANADA, MEXICO (03): SWINE
*******************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[1]
Date: Thu 26 Apr 2007
Source: Washington Post [edited]
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/04/26/AR2007042
602081_pf.html>


U.S. Quarantines 6000 Hogs Fed Tainted Pet Food
------------------------------------------------
Some 6000 hogs have been quarantined across 8 U.S. states because
they may have eaten contaminated salvage pet food, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) announced late Thu [26 Apr 2007]. At the
same time, U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) officials said that
meat from 345 hogs that ate tainted feed has already entered the U.S.
food supply, the Associated Press (AP) reported.

The quarantined hogs are on farms in California, New York, South
Carolina, North Carolina, Utah, Kansas, Oklahoma and Ohio, the AP
said. And the USDA reported that swine from slaughterhouses in Kansas
and Utah may have entered the food supply. Government officials,
however, consider the threat to human health to be very low. The
swine are thought to have been exposed to food contaminated by 2
chemicals, melamine and cyanuric acid, that was sent as salvage by
companies who have had to recall massive quantities of dog and cat
food as the pet food recall rolls on.

"Today we notified 8 states that adulterated swine products will not
be approved to enter the food supply," Captain David Elder, director
of the FDA's Office of Enforcement Office of Regulatory Affairs, said
during a late afternoon teleconference. He stressed, however, that
"based on information currently available, the FDA and the USDA
believe the likelihood of illness after eating such pork is
extremely low. However, the agencies also believe it is prudent to
take this measure."

According to the AP, potentially contaminated pet food scraps may
also have found their way to a poultry feed mill in Missouri. That
case remains under investigation.

Melamine was first found in pet foods manufactured by the Canadian
company Menu Foods, which began its widely publicized recall 16 Mar
[2007]. That recall included moist dog and cat foods made with
melamine-contaminated wheat gluten imported from China. The recall
has since expanded to other pet food manufacturers and other pet food
ingredients, including imported rice protein concentrate and corn
gluten.

In a new recall added on Thu [26 Apr 2007], Chenango Valley Pet
Foods, of Shelburne, NY, announced it was recalling a variety of
shipments of dry pet foods, including selected packets of: Doctors
Foster & Smith Chicken & Brown Rice Formula Adult Lite Dog Food;
Doctors Foster & Smith Chicken & Brown Rice Formula Adult Lite Cat
Food; Lick Your Chops Lamb Meal, Rice & Egg Cat Food, and Bulk
Chicken & Brown Rice Formula Adult Lite Dog Food.

In addition to melamine, the FDA has now found cyanuric acid in the
rice protein concentrate and wheat gluten used in much of the pet
food recalled over the past few weeks. Like melamine, cyanuric acid
is a chemical that can be used to boost the apparent protein content
of foods. It is most often used as a stabilizer in outdoor swimming
pools and hot tubs.

"The combination of melamine and cyanuric acid is of concern to human
and animal health," Elder said. "Melamine, at detected levels, is not
a human health concern," he added.

The USDA will compensate hog farmers affected by the tainted pet
food, Kenneth Peterson, an assistant administrator for field
operations at the USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS),
said during the teleconference. "The pork and pork products from
these animals will be destroyed," Peterson said. Each year, more than
105 million hogs are slaughtered in the United States, the AP noted.
Elder also announced that the FDA has been granted visas to go to
China to look for the sources of the contamination.

On Thu [26 Apr 2007] China banned melamine from its food products,
but rejected the charge that that the substance caused the pet
deaths, the AP reported. China's Foreign Ministry said in a statement
that there was no evidence to support the FDA's claim, but that it
would cooperate with the United States to find out what actually
killed the animals.

"At present, there is no clear evidence showing that melamine is the
direct cause of the poisoning or death of the pets," the statement
said. "China is willing to strengthen cooperation with the U.S. side
... to find out the real cause leading to the pet deaths in order to
protect the health of the pets of the two countries."

For more information on pet food, visit the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration at:
<http://www.fda.gov>

SOURCES: 26 Apr 2007 teleconference with Captain David Elder,
director, Office of Enforcement Office of Regulatory Affairs, U.S.
Food and Drug Administration; Kenneth Peterson, assistant
administrator for field operations, Food Safety and Inspection
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture; 26 Apr 2007 statement,
Chenango Valley Pet Foods; Associated Press

[Byline: Steven Reinberg]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Joseph P.Dudley

[2]
Date: Wed 25 Apr 2007
Source: Reuters.com [edited]
<http://www.reuters.com/article/domesticNews/idUSWBT00687920070425>


Health officials are now looking at whether humans may have consumed
food containing a chemical linked to a recall of pet foods and
livestock feed, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said on Tue [24
Apr 2007]. FDA officials said they would inspect imports of 6 grain
products used in foods ranging from bread to baby formula for traces
of melamine, a chemical thought to have killed and sickened cats and
dogs.

The California Agriculture Department said separately it was trying
to contact 50 people who bought pork that may have come from pigs fed
food containing melamine. The state's health department recommended
humans not consume the meat, but said any health risk was minimal.

Melamine, a chemical used in plastics and fertilizer, has already
been found in wheat gluten and rice protein imported from China for
use in some pet foods, triggering a recall of more than 100 brands.
The FDA named the 6 grain products to be inspected as wheat gluten,
corn gluten, corn meal, soy protein, rice bran and rice protein.

"We're going to target firms that we know are receiving imported
products," said David Acheson, chief medical officer of the FDA's
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN) in a conference
call with reporters. "The goal is obviously to sample as much as we
can."

There is little research on melamine's effect on humans, according to
World Health Organization (WHO), but the chemical has been studied in
animals for its risk of kidney problems and cancer. The WHO does not
classify the chemical as a carcinogen for people.

Some tainted material was used for hog feed before the contamination
was found, and officials said on Tue [24 Apr 2007] thousands of pigs
might be affected on farms in North and South Carolina, California,
New York, Utah and possibly Ohio.
The FDA is working with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and
several states to investigate the now-quarantined farms and whether
hogs on those farms were slaughtered for human food.

"Some of the hog operations were fairly sizable," said Stephen
Sundlof, director of the FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine. But
USDA spokesman Steve Cohen said the feed was sold to smaller and
independent hog farms. A poultry farm in Missouri also may have
received tainted feed, officials added. Still, the FDA has no
intention of banning imports of wheat gluten, rice protein or similar
products from China.

"We believe the safety net is in place to make sure that no
additional products are going to get into the commerce of the United
States," said David Elder, director of FDA's enforcement office.

Melamine was first found in March [2007] in wheat gluten used for
some pet foods. Menu Foods, Procter & G
</body>
