<header id=028644>
Published Date: 2011-06-26 15:33:10 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Bovine tuberculosis, bovine - Canada: (BC)
Archive Number: 20110626.1959
</header>
<body id=028644>
BOVINE TUBERCULOSIS, BOVINE - CANADA: (BRITISH COLUMBIA)
********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 24 Jun 2011
Source: Castanet.net [edited]
http://www.castanet.net/news/North-Okanagan/62834/Bovine-TB-on-Cherryville-farm


Bovine tuberculosis has been confirmed on a farm in the Cherryville
area east of Vernon.

Kevin Boon of the B.C. Cattleman's Association says the infection was
discovered back in May 2011. "Testing for bovine TB is part of a
normal investigation and can easily be detected and picked up on
thorough investigation."

Tuberculosis is a contagious disease caused by an infection in the
lymph nodes, which is then spread to other organs like the lungs. The
disease is spread through the air by coughing as well as through
contaminated feed and water. Young calves may be infected by drinking
unpasteurized infected milk. [If this is not a dairy herd, a nursing
calf would certainly be receiving unpasteurized milk. - Mod.TG]

Once the disease has been detected, it must be processed by the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency. The CFIA tests all animals, and all
infected animals and all exposed susceptible animals may be destroyed.
This is the only proven way to eliminate the disease.

Boon says producers can suffer financially if their cattle contract
bovine TB, as they must pay to have all their cattle tested and
quarantined.

"If they are waiting for CFIA to conduct tests, they may miss the
opportunity to market their cattle."

Owners could be compensated under the Health of Animal Act if the
cattle have to be destroyed. Boon says sometimes the government is
able to help with financial compensation.

Once a CFIA inspector has confirmed that the premises have been
cleaned and disinfected, the quarantine can be lifted. The owner must
wait 30 days before they can replace their cattle. All replacement
animals have to be tested for up to 4 years.

The last outbreak of bovine TB in 2007 led to the slaughter of almost
500 cattle in B.C. and Alberta.

According to Boon, the current outbreak of bovine TB does have the
potential for trade consequences. However, Communications Specialist
for CFIA Christine Russell says to date, this infection has not
affected Canada's TB-free status. "Because Canada's TB status remains
unchanged, this does not affect trade with our American partners."

Humans can contract bovine TB. Owners and handlers of infected cattle
are at risk for the disease, although Boon says the disease is not
easily transmitted to humans.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Bovine tuberculosis results from infection by _Mycobacterium bovis_,
a Gram positive, acid-fast bacterium in the _Mycobacterium
tuberculosis_ complex of the family Mycobacteriaceae.

This disease is a significant zoonosis that can spread to humans,
typically by the inhalation of aerosols or the ingestion of
unpasteurized milk. In developed countries, eradication programs have
reduced or eliminated tuberculosis in cattle, and human disease is now
rare; however, reservoirs in wildlife can make complete eradication
difficult.

Cattle shed _M. bovis_ in respiratory secretions, feces and milk, and
sometimes in the urine, vaginal secretions or semen. Large numbers of
organisms may be shed in the late stages of infection. Asymptomatic
and anergic [non-reactive to the tuberculin skin test] carriers occur.
In most cases, _M. bovis_ is transmitted between cattle in aerosols
during close contact. Some animals become infected when they ingest
the organism; this route may be particularly important in calves that
nurse from infected cows. Cutaneous, genital, and congenital
infections have been seen but are rare. All infected cattle do not
transmit the disease. Ingestion appears to be the primary route of
transmission in pigs, ferrets, cats and probably deer. In addition,
cats can be infected by the respiratory route or via percutaneous
transmission in bites and scratches. Nonhuman primates are usually
infected by inhalation. Aerosol transmission also seems to be the main
route of spread in badgers, but transmission in bite wounds can be
significant. Badgers with advanced disease can shed _M. bovis_ in the
urine, and organisms have been found in the feces. Due to behavioral
changes, badgers and possums are most likely to transmit _M. bovis_ to
cattle during the late stages of disease.

_M. bovis_ can infect humans, primarily by the ingestion of
unpasteurized dairy products but also in aerosols and through breaks
in the skin. Raw or undercooked meat can also be a source of the
organism. Person-to-person transmission is rare in immunocompetent
individuals, but _M. bovis_ has occasionally been transmitted within
small clusters of people, particularly alcoholics or HIV-infected
individuals. Rarely, humans have infected cattle via aerosols or in
urine.

The clinical signs of bovine tuberculosis usually take months to
develop in cattle. Infections can also remain dormant for years and
reactivate during periods of stress or in old age.

Tuberculosis is usually a chronic debilitating disease in cattle, but
it can occasionally be acute and rapidly progressive. Early infections
are often without clinical signs. In countries with eradication
programs, most infected cattle are identified early and clinical
infections are uncommon. In the late stages, common clinical signs
include progressive emaciation, a low-grade fluctuating fever,
weakness and inappetence [loss of appetite]. Animals with pulmonary
involvement usually have a moist cough that is worse in the morning,
during cold weather or exercise, and may have dyspnea or tachypnea
[shortness of breath]. In the terminal stages, animals may become
extremely emaciated and develop acute respiratory distress. In some
animals, the retropharyngeal or other lymph nodes enlarge and may
rupture and drain. Greatly enlarged lymph nodes can also obstruct
blood vessels, airways, or the digestive tract. If the digestive tract
is involved, intermittent diarrhea and constipation may be seen.

Bovine tuberculosis can be controlled by test-and-slaughter or
test-and-segregation methods. Affected herds are re-tested
periodically to eliminate cattle that may shed the organism; the
tuberculin test is generally used. Infected herds are usually
quarantined, and animals that have been in contact with reactors are
traced. Only test-and-slaughter techniques are guaranteed to eradicate
tuberculosis from domesticated animals.

Some human infections are asymptomatic. In other cases, localized or
disseminated disease can develop either soon after infection, or many
years later when waning immunity allows the infection to reactivate.
Localized disease can affect the lymph nodes, skin, bones and joints,
genitourinary system, meninges or respiratory system. Cervical
lymphadenopathy (scrofula), which primarily affects the tonsillar and
pre-auricular lymph nodes, was once a very common form of tuberculosis
in children who drank infected milk. In some cases, these lymph nodes
rupture and drain to the skin; chronic skin disease (lupus vulgaris)
may occasionally result. Humans infected through the skin can develop
localized skin disease ("butcher wart"), a form usually thought to be
benign and self-limiting. Pulmonary disease is more common in people
with reactivated infections than initially; the symptoms may include
fever, cough, chest pain, cavitation and hemoptysis [coughing up
blood]. Genitourinary disease can result in kidney failure. Bovine
tuberculosis can be treated successfully with antimicrobial drugs, but
untreated infections may be fatal.

Canada and the USA have a program for TB eradication and worked
together for many years to eradicate this disease from the animal
populations of bovines and cervids.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from:
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/bovine_tuberculosis.pdf.
- Mod.TG]
See Also
2010
----
Tuberculosis - Canada: (NU), Inuit 20101008.3659
2009
----
Bovine tuberculosis - Canada: (MB) cervid 20091023.3641
2007
----
Tuberculosis, bovine - Canada (02): (BC, AB) 20071202.3884
Tuberculosis, bovine - Canada: (BC, AB) 20071111.3664
Tuberculosis, cervids - Canada (MB) (03) 20070918.3094
Tuberculosis, cervids - Canada (MB) (02) 20070915.3068
Tuberculosis, cervids - Canada (MB) 20070914.3060
.................................................sb/tg/msp/jw
</body>
