<header id=022867>
Published Date: 2011-09-10 10:18:37 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Influenza (53): WHO update
Archive Number: 20110910.2758
</header>
<body id=022867>
INFLUENZA (53): WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION UPDATE
************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 9 Sep 2011
Source: World Health Organisation (WHO), Influenza update 142
[edited]
http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/latest_update_GIP_surveillance/en/index.html


WHO Influenza Update number 142
-------------------------------
Countries in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere:
-----------------------------------------------------------
The countries in the northern hemisphere temperate zone are in their
inter-seasonal period for influenza. Nearly all of the countries in
this zone reported low or no influenza activity. Of interest, the USA
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reported 4 cases
of swine influenza A(H3N2) virus in children in the states of Indiana
(1 case) and Pennsylvania (3 cases). The virus is similar to one that
has been circulating in swine since 1998 and which has been previously
identified in 8 human cases. The viral genome contains seven of the 8
gene segments from the circulating swine H3N2 viruses, including the
hemaglutinin and neuraminidase genes, however, it is unique in that it
contains one gene segment, the M gene, derived from the pandemic
influenza A(H1N1) virus. The swine H3N2 viruses have antigenic
cross-reactivity with human H3N2 viruses circulating in the 1990s. The
Indiana case did not have direct exposure to pigs but had contact with
a care-giver who did have recent swine contact. The 3 cases in
Pennsylvania had all recently visited a fair where swine were present.
The virus does not appear to have spread widely in humans; however,
investigations are ongoing.

For more information, see the CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 9 Sep 2011 / 60(35);1213-1215; the Pennsylvania Department of
Health website; and the ProMED-mail archived posts listed below.

Countries in the tropical zone
------------------------------
Snapshot: Southern Asia circulation of influenza viruses pdf, 391kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/2011_09_09_influenza_southern_asia_circulation_main.pdf

In Central and tropical South America, several countries reported low
levels of influenza transmission. In the Dominican Republic, influenza
transmission continued to decrease from a peak in July [2011] with
influenza type B now the predominant influenza virus detected.
Influenza virus detections in Cuba have increased steadily over the
last 4 weeks, with influenza A(H3N2) accounting for the large
majority. Honduras has also reported increasing detections of
influenza A(H3N2) during the same period of time associated with and
increasing proportion of hospitalizations for severe acute respiratory
infection (SARI) and is higher than during the same period of 2010;
one SARI related death was reported over the last 2 reporting weeks.
Other Central American countries reported no or very low influenza
activity. In tropical South America, transmission in Brazil peaked in
late June or early July and has returned to low levels. Transmission
in Brazil was evenly distributed between influenza A(H1N1)2009 and
A(H3N2), with smaller amounts of influenza type B. A similar pattern
and time course was noted in Bolivia and Colombia.

Influenza activity in most of tropical Asia is now low. In southern
Asia India, Bangladesh, Thailand, and Singapore have recently reported
moderate influenza transmission, most of which has been influenza
A(H3N2) with very small numbers influenza type B. Transmission in
these countries appears to have peaked in mid July [2011], although
some low level transmission has continued recently. In South East
Asia, Viet Nam and Cambodia have had influenza A(H1N1)2009
transmission mixed with influenza type B. In both countries,
transmission appears to be declining since early August. Notably, the
severe viral pneumonia surveillance system has detected 27 cases (27
percent of all tested) that were positive for influenza virus. Of
these 27 positive samples, 26 (96 percent) were pA/H1N1 and 1 (4
percent) was type B influenza virus.

In sub-Saharan Africa, influenza transmission has continued in the
west though detection rates have decreased in Ghana and Togo since
peaking in mid July. Transmission in Cameroon has, however, has
continued to increase in recent weeks. In all 3 countries, virus
detections have been both influenza A(H1N1)2009 and type B in fairly
equal proportions. In eastern Africa, transmission in Kenya has been
continuous since the peak in March, though at much lower levels. Virus
detections there have been both influenza A(H1N1)2009 and influenza
type B.

Countries in the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere
----------------------------------------------------------
South America
-------------
Snapshot: Temperate South America circulation of influenza viruses
pdf, 389kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/2011_09_09_influenza_temperate_south_america_circulation_main.pdf


In South America, the influenza season appears to have peaked and
several indicators suggest that the season has been mild in comparison
with previous years. In Chile, influenza-like illness (ILI) activity
has remained low in comparison to previous years with a peak of 7
consultations per 100 000 inhabitants. Admissions for respiratory
infections in children and the number of samples testing positive for
influenza have also remain low; although 2 deaths associated with
influenza A(H1N1)2009 were registered over the last 2 reporting weeks.
Influenza A(H1N1)2009 has accounted for the large majority of both ILI
and SARI cases in Chile this season. Virus detections and respiratory
disease activity in Chile appeared to level off in mid August. ILI,
pneumonia, and influenza virus detections in Argentina all peaked 3 to
4 weeks earlier in Argentina than in Chile. All 3 have been at
moderate levels compared to 5 year national averages. In contrast to
Chile, Argentina started the season with a predominance of influenza
A(H1N1)2009 but transitioned to a predominance of influenza A(H3N2) by
mid season in late July [2011] after which very little H1N1 was
detected. In Uruguay, respiratory disease activity also appears to
have leveled off in late July or early August. The proportions of SARI
hospitalizations and SARI ICU admissions were below 5 percent and 15
percent respectively and the proportion of SARI deaths decreased below
2 percent. The large majority of virus detections in Uruguay have been
H1N1 (2009) with smaller amounts of H3N2 early in the season.

Southern Africa
---------------
Snapshot: Southern Africa circulation of influenza viruses pdf, 384kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/2011_09_09_influenza_southern_africa_circulation_main.pdf

Influenza transmission in South Africa has remained at low level since
peaking in early June [2011].

Australia, New Zealand and South Pacific
----------------------------------------
Snapshot: Oceania Melanesia and Polynesia circulation of influenza
viruses pdf, 390kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/2011_09_09_influenza_oceania_circulation_main.pdf

The state of New South Wales, Australia, has reported an unusual
cluster of influenza cases infected with oseltamivir resistant
A(H1N1)2009 viruses in the Newcastle region. 25 influenza cases have
been identified over a 3 month period. The viruses all carry the H275Y
substitution, which is known to confer high level oseltamivir
resistance. In contrast, only 2 detections of viruses with this
genetic marker for oseltamivir resistance have been detected in the
country previously this year [2011], one in January and one in March.
The 1st resistant virus was detected in the Newcastle region in May,
the most recent in August; 14 percent of viruses from Newcastle tested
during that time have the H275Y substitution. Of 16 cases that have
been interviewed, none had previously been treated or exposed to
oseltamivir and 15 of the 16 live within a 50 kilometer [31 mile]
radius. The epidemiological picture is one of community transmission
of the resistant virus in a limited geographic area so far. Of note,
all of the resistant viruses are similar antigenically to the H1N1
strain contained in the current trivalent seasonal influenza vaccine,
indicating that vaccination would provide protection. The New South
Wales Health department is continuing to investigate.

Overall, influenza activity appears to have peaked in much of the
country, though regional increases are still being reported in some
areas. Specifically, influenza notifications have decreased in
Queensland, New South Wales (NSW), and South Australia, but other
states continue to report increases. The Influenza Complications Alert
Network sentinel hospital system in Victoria, South Australia, Western
Australia, and the Australia Capital Territory (ACT) reported 88
hospitalizations, including 7 intensive care unit (ICU) admissions,
associated with influenza since 1 May 2011. Over half of the
hospitalizations and 71 percent of ICU admissions have been associated
with influenza A(H1N1)2009 infection. The mean age of patients
hospitalized has been 47.3 years. The Australian Paediatric
Surveillance Unit reported 24 hospitalizations associated with severe
influenza complications in children from 1 Jul 2011 till 22 Aug 2011,
including 9 ICU admissions with the majority also associated with
influenza A(H1N1)2009; notably, more than one third of cases
hospitalized had chronic underlying conditions.

In 2011, 11 influenza associated deaths have been notified nationally
to date with a median age of 53 years. 8 of the cases were reported as
having an influenza A(H1N1)2009, 2 with influenza type B and one with
an un-subtyped influenza A infection. In NSW, the death registration
data up to 5 Aug 2011 was below the seasonal threshold for this period
with 1.8 pneumonia or influenza associated deaths per 100 000
population. The country continues to have some regional variation in
the predominant type or subtype of influenza virus being detected. In
recent weeks the proportion of influenza type B in South Australia has
continued to decline and currently represents a significant proportion
(43 percent) of influenza notifications, with the remainder being
mostly influenza A(H1N1)2009. The majority of Australian states and
territories now have influenza A(H1N1)2009 more commonly detected,
with co-circulation of influenza type B; however, in Tasmania
influenza type B accounts for the majority of influenza virus
detections and Western Australia is reporting a mix of mostly
influenza A(H1N1)2009, A(H3N2) and some influenza type B.

In New Zealand, the rate of national ILI consultations was 55.5 per
100 000 (210 ILI consultations) and remains stable around the seasonal
threshold level. Influenza type B virus accounts for the majority of
influenza viruses detected in New Zealand. In the Pacific Islands,
most countries reported low influenza activity with the exception of
Samoa, Tonga, the Solomon Islands and Kiribati. Samoa has experienced
an increase in ILI. Tonga, the Solomon Islands and Kiribati reported
sustained activity. Fiji reported fluctuating ILI activity, but the
level has declined over the past 5 weeks.

>From the peer-reviewed literature
---------------------------------
Researchers in China have reported an association between the
occurrence of narcolepsy and respiratory disease. In a cross-sectional
retrospective ecological study examining the history of narcolepsy
onset in 629 patients (mostly children) diagnosed with narcolepsy in
Beijing, China between 1998 and 2010, researchers identified a
seasonal pattern in the onset, with highest observed incidence in
April to July. A 3 to 4 fold increase in even this peak incidence was
noted in 2010 (per a linear trend line fit to the past time series),
mirroring the reported increase in influenza cases from official
sources during the 2009/10 winter season. The majority of these 154
narcolepsy cases in 2010 were young children, and only 4 percent of
these cases reported receiving an H1N1 vaccination (using a
non-adjuvanted H1N1 monovalent vaccine). Finding, in their study, an
association between infection and narcolepsy, but not an association
with vaccination, the authors suggest that winter airway infections,
including influenza A and/or _S. pyogenes_ are the likely triggers for
narcolepsy. The authors felt that the 4-6 month delay between winter
airway infection and narcolepsy onset occurrence was consistent with
animal studies showing that approximately 80 percent cell loss is
required to exhibit symptoms; winter airway infections could initiate
or reactivate an immune response that leads to hypocretin cell loss
and narcolepsy in generally susceptible individuals.

Comment: While influenza is considered primarily a disease of the
respiratory tract, it is clear that it may on occasion cause disease
in other body systems, including the central nervous system. An
association between "winter airway infections" and neurological
complications was also noted in the years surrounding the 1918
pandemic and neurological complications have been reported in numerous
case series from seasonal influenza A(H3N2) epidemics and the 2009/10
influenza A(H1N1)2009 pandemic. Influenza infection has been linked to
cases of encephalopathy, seizures, and altered level of consciousness.
Neurological manifestations are occasionally the presenting illness
with influenza infection and likely occur more often in children and
adolescents.

Reference: Han, F., et al. Narcolepsy onset is seasonal and increased
following the 2009 H1N1 pandemic in China, 2011, Annals of Neurology.
doi: 10.1002/ana.22587(2011).

Source of data in this update
-----------------------------
The Global Influenza Programme monitors influenza activity worldwide
and publishes an update every 2 weeks. The updates are based on
available epidemiological and virological data sources, including
FluNet (reported by the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response
System) and influenza reports from WHO Regional Offices and Member
States. Completeness can vary among updates due to availability and
quality of data available at the time when the update is developed.

Maps and graphs
--------------
- Global circulation of influenza viruses (snapshot) pdf, 387kb
http://www.who.int/influenza/surveillance_monitoring/updates/2011_09_09_influenza_global_circulation.pdf

- Northern hemisphere circulation of influenza viruses (real-time)
http://gamapserver.who.int/gareports/Default.aspx?ReportNo=5&Hemisphere=Northern

- Southern hemisphere circulation of influenza viruses (real-time)
http://gamapserver.who.int/gareports/Default.aspx?ReportNo=5&Hemisphere=Southern

FluNet charts on circulation of influenza viruses (number of specimens
positive for influenza by subtypes) and graphs by country, area or
territory as well as by influenza transmission zone and WHO region are
available form the WHO Influenza Map Library.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Summary:
--------
- Countries in the temperate regions of the northern hemisphere
reported low or undetectable influenza activity. The United States of
America (USA) has recently reported 4 human cases of swine influenza
A(H3N2) containing a novel reassortment with an M gene derived from
influenza A(H1N1)2009.

- Influenza activity in the tropical zone was mostly low with the
exception of a few countries of the Americas (Cuba and Honduras),
Western Africa (Cameroon and Senegal), and Southern Asia (Bangladesh
and Thailand) that reported continued transmission.

- In South America the influenza season has been mild and has peaked
with variation in the predominant type and subtype of virus
circulating in different countries in the area. Influenza activity may
have peaked nationally in Australia, though regional increases are
still being reported. New South Wales, Australia, has recently
reported a cluster of 25 cases with oseltamivir-resistant influenza
A(H1N1)2009 virus infection. The cases occurred in a limited
geographic area but occurred over a 3 month period of time. Of note,
none of the cases interviewed had previously been exposed to
oseltamivir or had other risk factors previously associated with the
development of oseltamivir resistance. This represents the largest
cluster of oseltamivir resistant viruses to date and the most
persistent period of community transmission. Investigations are
ongoing to determine the full extent of spread of the virus.

Interested readers are recommended to view the the WHO maps and graphs
referenced above that provide a pain-free appreciation of the current
influenza situation. Currently there is no evidence suggesting the
appearance of a novel epidemic strains not containable by the
currently available vaccine. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza (52): (PA), swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, 3 cases 20110906.2723
Influenza (51): swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, children 20110902.2685
Influenza (50): Australia (NS) H275Y mutation cluster 20110825.2594
Influenza (49): China, narcolepsy 20110823.2561
Influenza (48): ACIP recommendations 20110818.2510
Influenza (47): ECDC report, virus characterization 20110816.2477
Influenza (46): Australia (QL) 20110815.2472
Influenza (45): vaccine & narcolepsy 20110723.2210
Influenza B - Australia: (SA), young people 20110719.2186
Influenza (44): WHO update 20110716.2155
.................................................cp/ejp/dk
</body>
