<header id=061008>
Published Date: 2007-11-11 17:00:12 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Strep. pneumoniae, serotypes 5, 19A - Canada: (BC, ON)
Archive Number: 20071111.3666
</header>
<body id=061008>
STREPTOCOCCUS PNEUMONIAE, SEROTYPES 5, 19A - CANADA: (BRITISH
COLUMBIA, ONTARIO)
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[1]
Date: Thu 8 Nov 2007
Source: Toronto Sun [edited]
<http://www.torontosun.com/News/2007/11/08/4640494.html>


A child is being treated in Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children for
a case of meningitis caused by a worrisome multi-drug resistant
strain of the _Streptococcus pneumoniae_ bacteria, a hospital
official confirmed Wednesday [7 Nov 2007]. The head of infectious
diseases for the hospital said doctors elsewhere in Ontario should
consider the possibility of a multi-drug resistant strain when faced
with cases of pneumococcal disease in children.

"The most important thing ... is that it identifies and confirms the
need for there to be a heightened state of alertness, as this relates
to surveillance to determine the full extent of this ... and whether
or not this truly represents a sporadic event, or is this part of any
evolving trend," Dr. Upton Allen said in an interview. "One needs to
consider that children presenting -- particularly those presenting
with severe disease such as meningitis -- could have a 19A strain or
in fact other strains that might be resistant to antibiotics."

In children, _Streptococcus pneumoniae_ -- also known as pneumococcus
-- often causes ear infections, though it can also cause pneumonia,
bloodstream infections and meningitis, an infection of the fluid in
spinal cord and around the brain.

The unidentified child's illness was caused by a variant of the 19A
strain of _Streptococcus pneumoniae_ that is resistant to the
antibiotic ceftriaxone, a treatment staple for bacterial meningitis
in children. The child is still not out of the woods. "The child is
still quite ill," Allen said. "We still have a far way to go as far
as treatment." When it became apparent the initial treatment regime
wasn't working, a number of other antibiotics were tried without
success, he said. Eventually doctors turned to levofloxicin, a
powerful antibiotic not typically used in meningitis in children.
That drug was effective against the bacteria.

"It is unsettling," Allen admitted about seeing such a case. "We
often, in the treatment of meningitis in children, are faced with
situations where we have medications that we're absolutely sure will
work against all cases. And here was one that basically was acquired
in the community, came into hospital, and the initial antibiotics
weren't exactly right on as far as being totally perfect, simply
because this was a very resistant strain, an unusual occurrence."

Multi-drug resistant variants of 19A have recently been reported to
be causing pneumococcal disease in parts of the northeastern United States.

Infectious disease experts at the University of Rochester, N.Y.
reported at a major medical conference earlier in the fall 2007 that
they had seen a number of cases of ear infections in children caused
by a 19A variant that was resistant to all antibiotics approved for
treatment of ear infections in the United States; see ProMED-mail
20071022.3437].

The 19A subtype is not covered by the pneumococcal vaccine commonly
given to children, Wyeth Pharmaceutical's Prevnar. The vaccine covers
the 7 strains of the bacteria that were responsible for the most
pneumococcal illness before the vaccine was introduced. A new
version, which will cover the 13 top strains -- including 19A -- is
currently in clinical trials in a number of countries, including Canada.

Since the introduction of Prevnar, infectious disease experts have
been watching closely to see whether other severe strains of the
disease become more commonplace as the vaccine reduces levels of the
former top 7 strains. Some have theorized that the emergence of a
multi-drug resistant variant of 19A may be linked to that phenomenon,
known as "replacement disease." But others insist it's too soon to say.

Dr. David Scheifele, a vaccine expert at B.C. Children's Hospital,
said study in Canada has shown that about 5 per cent of pneumococcal
bacteria are resistant to ceftriaxone. And Dr. Allison McGeer, an
infectious diseases expert at Toronto's Mount Sinai Hospital, said
there have been earlier findings of multi-drug resistant variants of
19A. "We've had invasive disease," caused by resistant 19A strains,
McGeer said. "We've not had a meningitis with it."

[Byline: Helen Branswell]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

******
[2]
Date: Fri 9 Nov 2007
Source: Globe and Mail [edited]
<http://www.globeandmail.com>


Ontario is to issue an alert by tomorrow [10 Nov 2007] to warn of a
new, menacing strain of bacteria that can cause severe illness, after
a toddler was stricken by a mysterious "superbug."

David Williams, the province's acting chief medical officer of
health, will issue the alert to notify doctors, public health
agencies and health-care providers in Ontario of the
multidrug-resistant 19A sub-strain of pneumococcus, Health Ministry
spokesman David Jensen said yesterday [8 Nov 2007]. "We're continuing
to monitor and keep track of this strain, and we will be updating
doctors and public health officials so they have the very latest
information and need to be vigilant against it," Mr. Jensen said yesterday.

Ontario has had 48 cases of 19A pneumococcus since December 2006, but
only one case so far of this particular multidrug-resistant
sub-strain, he said. A 14-month-old is being treated at the Hospital
for Sick Children for meningitis, an infection of the fluid around
the spinal cord and brain that can lead to deafness and neurological
damage. The child was healthy, fully vaccinated and had not traveled,
suggesting the superbug was acquired in the Toronto region. "This, to
me, over the last 10 to 12 years is the worst one I've seen," Donald
Low, chief of microbiology at Mount Sinai Hospital, said in a
telephone interview yesterday [8 Nov 2007]. "We always have to be
vigilant and do surveillance; these bacteria are so adaptable."

This particular sub-strain of 19A is not included in a vaccine given
to children. However, the vaccine is still very powerful and protects
against many other strains of pneumococcal infection. Barbara Yaffe,
director of communicable disease control for Toronto Public Health,
said the child was not in daycare and no contact follow-up was
warranted. "If the child was in daycare or the person is in long-term
care, we would follow up, mostly because there's a lot of anxiety
associated with meningitis," Dr. Yaffe said, adding that people
should frequently wash their hands and have good basic hygiene.

Multidrug-resistant 19A pneumococcal sub-strains have already been
diagnosed in the United States, where doctors have had to administer
an antibiotic typically used to treat adults and not approved for use
in children.

Yesterday [8 Nov 2007], Upton Allen, head of infectious diseases at
the Hospital for Sick Children, stressed that physicians still have
antibiotics that work against the strain and that "children
presenting with severe infections can still be cured. We are able to
find antibiotics that we use in children, not just antibiotics used
in adults." Parents who have a child with an ear infection that is
not responding to treatment with antibiotics should contact their
doctor, something they would normally do in any event, Dr. Allen
said. "Doctors, with this report, will have an increased sense of
awareness that this particular strain has occurred in Ontario and we
have demonstrated it is a very resistant strain," Dr. Allen said.
"Therefore, they should continue to monitor the situation very
carefully to see if indeed we are going to see more cases in the future."

Neil Rau, an Oakville-based infectious-diseases specialist, dubbed
the sub-strain a highly resistant 19A. "This sub-strain is much more
resistant than I would usually see in my infectious-diseases
practice," he said. This case points to the need for a province-wide
surveillance system for tracking these types of infections, similar
to that of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "It
speaks to the need for good surveillance," Dr. Rau said. "Is it the
1st time we've had meningitis from this strain? It may well be. But
without a good surveillance system, I can't say for sure."

[Byline: Lisa Priest]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Fri 9 Nov 2007
Source: Rob Parker <Dr.Rob.Parker@interiorhealth.ca>


Public Health and the Communicable Disease Unit within Interior
Health (IH) have recently detected an outbreak of invasive
pneumococcal disease [IPD] serotype 5 (ST5-IPD) in Kelowna, British
Columbia, Canada. Since 1 Apr 2007, 47 cases of IPD (all serotypes)
were reported in IH; multiple recent cases (n=12) are serotype 5, a
serotype not historically circulating in IH. The 1st ST5-IPD case was
laboratory confirmed on 8 Aug 2007; the remaining 11 cases have
occurred in the past 8 weeks. No serotype 5 cases were reported
during the preceding 4 month period (1 Apr - 31 Jul 2007). However,
IH has seen a handful of scattered ST5-IPD cases (n=34) between 1 Sep
2006 - 31 Mar 2007, all with connections to Vancouver's Downtown
Eastside (DTES). During this time, there was no evidence of ongoing
transmission in the IH region itself.

Enhanced surveillance through medical records and interviews is being
conducted on all ST5-IPD cases. The primary risk factors identified
to date are homelessness and addiction, conditions that often
contribute to an impaired health status and a weakened immune system.
All of the cases to date have required hospitalization, and 2 have
required treatment in ICU. No cases have died. All were adults. Equal
numbers were male/female. There is a history of illicit drug use in
11 out of 12 cases, and 6 out of 12 cases were homeless. Most (11 out
of 12) had no documented history of 23-valent pneumococcal
polysaccharide immunization; for a single case, immunization was >4 years ago.

The serotype 5 strain of bacteria has not historically circulated in
western Canada, but began causing outbreaks in the urban-core poor in
Edmonton, Calgary and Vancouver in 2006. During the late Fall of
2006, Vancouver's DTES had an ST5-IPD outbreak (n=100+ cases). The
severe clinical presentation of these cases resulted in a major
impact on ICU bed-utilization in Vancouver, as a large proportion of
cases required ventilation.

This led to a BC-wide enhanced outreach immunization campaign with
23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine in December 2006, which
includes serotype 5. Over 5000 doses of vaccine were delivered by
Vancouver Public Health staff in the DTES. Though no case clusters of
ST5-IPD were occurring in the Interior Health region in the fall
2006, Public Health staff here immunized 1000+ at-risk individuals
dealing with homelessness or addictions in December 2006. These
immunization campaigns brought the outbreak under control in
Vancouver's DTES by early 2007 and, until recently, seemed to have
prevented any significant spread into the interior region of the province.

Public Health nurses and health care providers in Kelowna and
throughout IH are now redoubling efforts to provide immunizations to
the homeless and addicted. Downtown Kelowna's Outreach Urban Health
Primary Care Clinic will be coordinating immunization efforts with
Public Health to the outbreak at-risk groups there. Individuals can
also receive 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide immunization at
any Public Health Clinic in IH. Interior Health is alerting
hospitals, emergency rooms and mental health/addictions facilities to
also look for ways to provide opportunistic pneumococcal and
influenza immunization to individuals in the risk groups when they
come into contact with them.

Because the serotype 5 strain of pneumococcal bacteria has not
historically circulated among people in western Canada, non-immunized
people will not have specific immunity to it. However, the serotype 5
strain has not yet been seen to be causing invasive illness outbreaks
in children or the general public in BC, despite their lack of
earlier childhood natural exposure or vaccine-acquired immunity. It
could be that the serotype 5 strain of pneumococcus is itself not
more severe than the commonly circulating strains of pneumococcal
bacteria but largely only causes severe illness in those with
weakened immune systems and marginal living conditions. The "host"
and "environment" factors of the epidemiologic triad may be as or
more important in this particular situation than the "agent" as a factor.

--
Dr. Rob Parker
Jeanie Fraser and Denise McKay
Kelsey Kozoriz, 4th year University of British Columbia medical student
Interior Health Communicable Disease Unit
<Dr.Rob.Parker@interiorhealth.ca>

[Heptavalent conjugate pneumococcal vaccine (PCV7, manufactured by
Wyeth as Prevnar), which covers pneumococcal serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14,
18C, 19F, and 23F, was released in 2000 for routine vaccination of
children. CDC reported recently
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5641a2.htm>
that the number of cases of invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD), that
is, meningitis, pneumonia, or bacteremia without focus, increased in
Massachusetts during 2001-2006 in children (less than 18 years of
age) caused by pneumococcal serotypes (most notably 19A) not covered
by PCV7 and an associated increase in antimicrobial resistance among
these isolates. Of the 19A strains tested, 65 percent were
non-susceptible to penicillin. 15 percent were highly resistant to
ceftriaxone (MIC greater than 2 microgram/ml), a 1st-line
antimicrobial used for empiric bacterial meningitis treatment; 44
percent were resistant to azithromycin; and 32 percent were resistant
to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. No significant trends in the
antimicrobial resistance of non-19A isolates were noted.

Increases in the proportion of IPD caused by pneumococcal serotypes
not covered by PCV7 since its release in 2000 have been reported
previously (see ProMED-mail postings 20070425.1348 and
20071022.3437). Wyeth, in commenting on the CDC report
<http://medicalnewstoday.com/articles/84683.php>,
noted that serotype 19A is emerging globally in both regions where
Prevnar is available, as well as regions where it is not widely used,
and an increase in disease caused by 19A occurred in Korea even prior
to the introduction of Prevnar, perhaps representing emergence of an
antibiotic-resistant strain of a non-vaccine serotype due to overuse
of antibiotics, not vaccine use.

Prompt treatment with an antimicrobial drug to which the pneumococcus
is susceptible is essential in the treatment of pneumococcal
meningitis. Because of the possibility that this disease could be
caused by a cefriaxone-resistant strain, initial therapy for a
patient with pneumococcal meningitis, prior to report of
susceptibility result, should include both vancomycin along with
ceftriaxone, because of the reliable antimicrobial activity of
vancomycin against all pneumococci and because of the more reliable
cerebrospinal fluid penetration of ceftriaxone, if the strain turns
out to be ceftriaxone-susceptible. No mention in the news release is
made about use of vancomycin in this patient, which may fail because
of vancomycin's unreliable cerebrospinal fluid penetration.
Fluoroquinolones, such as levofloxacin, are usually not used in
children, but it was obviously efficacious in this instance, likely
because of its cerebrospinal fluid penetration and activity against
the strain of pneumococcus.

Dr. David Fisman, medical epidemiologist at the Ontario Central
Public Health Laboratory in Toronto, comments that the serogroup 19A
pneumococcus strain isolated from the toddler with meningitis is
resistant to penicillin (high level resistance), macrolides, sulfas,
tetracyclines, clindamycin, 3rd generation cephalosporins, and
carbapenems. The strain is fluoroquinolone, rifampin, telithromycin
and vancomycin sensitive. Dr. Fisman says that Dr. Michael Pichichero
in Rochester 1st described multidrug-resistant 19A pneumococcus in a
patient with otitis media that was published just 2 weeks ago in JAMA
[Pichichero ME, Casey JR. Emergence of a multiresistant serotype 19A
pneumococcal strain not included in the 7-valent conjugate vaccine as
an otopathogen in children. JAMA 2007;298(15):1772-8]. Dr. Fisman
notes that Rochester is just across Lake Ontario from Toronto (south
and just east). It would be interesting to see whether the Rochester
and Toronto isolates belong to the same clone.

In 2006, outbreaks of serotype 5 _S. pnuemoniae_ were reported in
Alberta and British Colombia, and also an increase in type 8 disease
was reported in Alberta. The serotype 5 isolates from Alberta at that
time appeared to be clonal. As in the current outbreak in British
Columbia, the 2006 outbreaks in both Alberta and British Columbia
were largely confined to an un-immunized indigent adult population
and associated with alcohol and illicit drug use. At that time, the
23-valent polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine that includes both
serotypes 5 and 8 was offered to all homeless persons and to those
with other risk factors identified in the Alberta and British
Columbia outbreaks. Repeated immunization campaigns are obviously
needed in this population to assure adequate immunization coverage.

Maps of the North American locations for Ontario, British Columbia
and the cities of Rochester in New York State and Toronto in Ontario
can be found at
<http://healthmap.org/promed>.
- Mod.ML]
See Also
Strep. pneumoniae, non-vaccine strain emergence - USA (02): (MA) 20071022.3437
Strep. pneumoniae, non-vaccine strain emergence - USA (AK) 20070425.1348
2006
----
Streptococcus pneumoniae, serotypes 5,8 - Canada (AB) 20061214.3520
Streptococcus pneumoniae, serotype 5 - Canada (BC) (02) 20061212.3502
Streptococcus pneumoniae, serotype 5 - Canada (BC) 20061209.3477
1999
----
Drug resistance, Pneumococcus - Canada (02) 19990904.1550
Pneumococcal meningitis, Japan: RFI 19990329.0499
1998
----
Antibiotic resistance, pneumococcal - South Africa & USA 19980428.0823
1997
----
Strep. pneumoniae, drug resistant - Canada (Ontario) 19970503.0904
...................................ml/msp/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
