<header id=052721>
Published Date: 2008-08-05 19:00:30 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (03)
Archive Number: 20080805.2406
</header>
<body id=052721>
ANTHRAX, HUMAN, 2001 - USA (03)
*******************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[1]
Date: Tue 5 Aug 2008
Source: The Wall Street Journal [edited]
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB121789293570011775.html?mod=opinion_main_commentaries>


Bruce Ivins wasn't the anthrax culprit
--------------------------------------
Over the past week the media was gripped by the news that the FBI
[Federal Bureau of Investigation] was about to charge Bruce Ivins, a
leading anthrax expert, as the man responsible for the anthrax letter
attacks in September/October 2001.

But despite the seemingly powerful narrative that Ivins committed
suicide because investigators were closing in, this is still far from
a shut case. The FBI needs to explain why it zeroed in on Ivins, how
he could have made the anthrax mailed to lawmakers and the media, and
how he (or anyone else) could have pulled off the attacks, acting alone.

I believe this is another mistake in the investigation.

Let's start with the anthrax in the letters to [Senators] Tom Daschle
and Patrick Leahy. The spores could not have been produced at the US
Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, where Ivins
worked, without many other people being aware of it. Furthermore, the
equipment to make such a product does not exist at the institute.

Information released by the FBI over the past 7 years indicates a
product of exceptional quality. The product contained essentially
pure spores. The particle size was 1.5 to 3 microns in diameter.
There are several methods used to produce anthrax that small. But
most of them require milling the spores to a size small enough that
it can be inhaled into the lower reaches of the lungs. In this case,
however, the anthrax spores were not milled.

What's more, they were also tailored to make them potentially more
dangerous. According to a FBI news release from November 2001, the
particles were coated by a "product not seen previously to be used in
this fashion before." Apparently, the spores were coated with a
polyglass, which tightly bound hydrophilic silica to each particle.
That's what was briefed (according to one of my former weapons
inspectors at the United Nations Special Commission) by the FBI to
the German Foreign Ministry at the time.

Another FBI leak indicated that each particle was given a weak
electric charge, thereby causing the particles to repel each other at
the molecular level. This made it easier for the spores to float in
the air, and increased their retention in the lungs.

In short, the potential lethality of anthrax in this case far exceeds
that of any powdered product found in the now extinct US Biological
Warfare Program. In meetings held on the cleanup of the anthrax
spores in Washington, the product was described by an official at the
Department of Homeland Security as "according to the Russian recipes"
-- apparently referring to the use of the weak electric charge.

The latest line of speculation asserts that the anthrax's DNA,
obtained from some of the victims, initially led investigators to the
laboratory where Ivins worked. But the FBI stated a few years ago
that a complete DNA analysis was not helpful in identifying what
laboratory might have made the product.

Furthermore, the anthrax in this case, the "Ames strain," is one of
the most common strains in the world. Early in the investigations,
the FBI said it was similar to strains found in Haiti and Sri Lanka.
The strain at the institute was isolated originally from an animal in
west Texas and can be found from Texas to Montana following the old
cattle trails. Samples of the strain were also supplied to at least 8
laboratories including 3 foreign laboratories. Four French government
laboratories reported on studies with the Ames strain, citing the
Pasteur Institute in Paris as the source of the strain they used.
Organism DNA is not a very reliable way to make a case against a scientist.

The FBI has not officially released information on why it focused on
Ivins, and whether he was about to be charged or arrested. And when
the FBI does release information, we should all remember that the
case needs to be firmly based on solid information that would
conclusively prove that a lone scientist could make such a
sophisticated product.

From what we know so far, Bruce Ivins, although potentially a
brilliant scientist, was not that man. The multiple disciplines and
technologies required to make the anthrax in this case do not exist
at Army's Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases.
Inhalation studies are conducted at the institute, but they are done
using liquid preparations, not powdered products.

The FBI spent between 12 and 18 months trying "to reverse engineer"
(make a replica of) the anthrax in the letters sent to Messrs.
Daschle and Leahy without success, according to FBI news releases. So
why should federal investigators, or the news media, or the American
public believe that a lone scientist would be able to do so?

[Byline: Richard Spertzel]
[Dr. Spertzel, head of the biological-weapons section of Unscom (UN
special commission) from 1994-99, was a member of the Iraq Survey Group].

--
Communicated by
Greg Koblentz
<gkoblentz@gmail.com>

[Richard Spertzel is highly regarded and respected. - Mod.MHJ]

******
[2]
Date: Tue 5 Aug 2008
Source: Los Angeles Times, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]
<http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-anthrax6-2008aug6,0,7972627.story>


Anthrax suspect's sorority obsession
------------------------------------
One of the biggest mysteries surrounding the anthrax scare of 2001 --
why the anthrax-laced letters were dropped off at a mailbox in New
Jersey -- may be connected to a sorority chapter at Princeton University.

Bruce Ivins' decades-long obsession with the Kappa Kappa Gamma
sorority could link the former Army biowarfare scientist to the 4
anthrax-laced letters, authorities said Monday [4 Aug 2008].

Still, authorities acknowledge they cannot place Ivins in Princeton
the day the anthrax was mailed. And the curious explanation
connecting the scientist and a sorority is unlikely to satisfy his
friends and former co-workers who question what motive the married
father of 2 might have had for unleashing the attack.

The mailbox just off the campus of Princeton University where the
letters were mailed sits about 100 yards (about 90 m) away from where
the college's Kappa Kappa Gamma chapter stores its rush materials,
initiation robes, and other property. Sorority members do not live
there, and the Kappa chapter at Princeton does not provide a house
for the women.

Multiple US officials told The Associated Press that Ivins was
obsessed with Kappa Kappa Gamma, going back as far as his own college
days at the University of Cincinnati when he apparently was rebuffed
by a woman in the sorority. The officials all spoke on condition of
anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the case
publicly. There is nothing to indicate Ivins was focused on any one
sorority member or other Princeton student, the officials said.
Instead, officials said, Ivins' e-mails and other documents detail
his long-standing fixation on the organization.

An adviser to the Kappa Kappa Gamma chapter at Princeton, Katherine
Breckinridge Graham, said Monday [4 Aug 2008] she was interviewed by
FBI agents "over the last couple of years" about the case. She said
she could not provide any details about the interview because she
signed an FBI nondisclosure form. However, Graham said there was
nothing to indicate that any of the sorority members had anything to
do with Ivins. "Nothing odd went on," said Graham, an attorney and
Kappa alumna. Kappa Kappa Gamma also has chapters at colleges in
Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Washington. The university does not
formally recognize sororities and fraternities, but chapters operate
off campus. Local police in both Princeton Borough and Princeton
Township said Ivins' name did not turn up on any incident reports or
restraining orders.

Had he lived, authorities had planned to argue that Ivins could have
made the 7-hour round trip to Princeton from the Fort Detrick lab in
Frederick, Maryland, after work. One official said investigators were
working off the theory that Ivins chose to mail the letters from
outside the sorority's Princeton chapter to confuse the government if
he ever were to emerge as a suspect in the case.

In August 2002, investigators announced they'd found anthrax spores
inside the mailbox on Nassau Street, Princeton's main thoroughfare.
FBI agents immediately began canvassing the town, showing residents a
photograph of Army scientist Steven J Hatfill, who at the time was a
key "person of interest" in the case. That theory fell flat and this
June [2008], the Justice Department exonerated Hatfill and agreed to
a USD 5.8 million settlement with him.

Details about Ivins' alleged obsession with the sorority will be
spelled out in court documents that could be made public as early as
Tuesday [5 Aug 2008]. The Justice Department is expected to decide
soon whether to end the "Amerithrax" investigation by concluding
Ivins acted alone in carrying out the attacks that killed 5 and
sickened 17. Even the government officials acknowledged the sorority
connection is a strange one, and it's not likely to ease concerns by
Ivins' friends and former co-workers who are skeptical about the case
against him.

Ivins' attorney, Paul F Kemp, did not immediately respond to a
message seeking comment Monday [4 Aug 2008] but has asserted his
client's innocence and said he would have been vindicated in court.

At least some of Ivins' former colleagues, as well as others who want
to see the FBI's still-secret evidence, question whether he could
have created the powder form of the deadly toxin without co-workers noticing.

Law enforcement officials familiar with the case said Ivins borrowed
freeze-drying equipment from a bioweapons lab in 2001 that was used
by scientists to convert wet anthrax spores into a powder similar to
that sent to journalists and lawmakers in the weeks after the
September 2001 terror attacks. Not commonly used by researchers at
the Fort Detrick, Maryland, lab where Ivins worked, the drying unit
-- known as a lyophilizer -- was lent to Ivins' unit after he went
through a formal process to check it out. While in his possession,
Ivins apparently tackled a project for the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency. Law enforcement officials, who spoke on condition of
anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly about
the inquiry, said the documents Ivins created during the check out
process and in his experiments are being mined for proof that he
might have used it to powderize anthrax spores.

In the past year, the FBI has turned its attention to Ivins, whom a
therapist said had a history of homicidal and sociopathic behavior.
[A Social worker] won a protective order against Ivins on 24 Jul
[2008] after telling a judge the scientist was a homicidal sociopath.
[This Social worker, aged 45], also has a minor criminal record,
according to court records. She pleaded guilty in April [2008] to
driving under the influence and was fined USD 500 and placed on
probation for nearly a year. In October 2006, she pleaded guilty to
reckless driving and was fined USD 580. A 1992 charge of possessing
drug paraphernalia was dismissed.

[Byline: Geoff Mulvihill and David Dishneau contributed to this report]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The sorority link is explained in the report below from the New York
Times. As a young man he had a crush on a girl. Gee! I am reliably
informed that at least one member of the military stationed at Ft
Detrick during the 2001 events and in months leading up to them had
family in Princeton. Presumably there were others. - Mod.MHJ]

******
[3]
Date: Tue 5 Aug 2008
Source: The New York Times [edited]
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/05/washington/05anthrax.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&ref=us>

Pressure grows for FBI's anthrax evidence
-----------------------------------------
After 4 years of painstaking scientific research, the FBI by 2005 had
traced the anthrax in the poisoned letters of 2001 to a single flask
of the bacteria at the Army biodefense laboratory at Fort Detrick,
Maryland, according to government scientists and bureau officials.
But at least 10 scientists had regular access to the laboratory and
its anthrax stock -- and possibly quite a few more, counting visitors
from other institutions, and workers at laboratories in Ohio and New
Mexico that had received anthrax samples from the flask at the Army laboratory.

To get that far, the FBI had helped invent what was virtually a new
science, microbial forensics, the use of biochemical clues to track a
germ weapon to its source. The bureau sponsored research at a score
of government and university laboratories intended to estimate the
age of the anthrax, tracing the water used to grow it, assessing how
it was made into an inhalable powder and, perhaps most important,
taking its genetic fingerprint. But at that point, the science had
largely reached its limits. To figure out who in the narrowed pool of
scientist-suspects was the perpetrator, the FBI would have to rely on
traditional gumshoe investigative methods: interviewing colleagues
and family members, searching houses and cars, doing surveillance,
and assessing personalities.

About 18 months ago, investigators appeared to sharpen their focus on
Bruce E Ivins, a veteran anthrax researcher, whom they placed under
intensive surveillance as they examined every aspect of his life and
work. Since Dr Ivins's suicide last week [29 Jul 2008], FBI officials
have said prosecutors were preparing to indict him for sending the
anthrax letters, which killed 5 people, although charges appear to
have been a few weeks away.

Dr Ivins had been a respected microbiologist for 3 decades at the
United States Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at
Fort Detrick. He was a popular neighbor in Frederick, Maryland, a Red
Cross volunteer, and an amateur juggler who played keyboards at his church.

But the investigators found some personal quirks, according to law
enforcement officials and people who knew the scientist well. They
found that Dr Ivins, who had a history of alcohol abuse, had for
years maintained a post office box under an assumed name that he used
to receive pornographic pictures of blindfolded women.

Years ago, he had visited Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority houses at
universities in Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia, an obsession
growing out of a romance with a sorority sister in his own college
days at the University of Cincinnati -- although someone who knew him
well said the last such visit was in 1981.

What is more relevant, agents focused new attention on a 2002 Army
investigation of a spill of anthrax the same year outside the secure
laboratory that Dr Ivins worked in, and his puzzling behavior in
trying to clean the area with bleach while failing to report the
contamination. They studied his anthrax vaccine patents and
considered whether the promise of royalties after a bioterrorism
scare might have been a motive. They noted that he had a lyophilizer,
which could be used to dry wet anthrax into powder, a form not
ordinarily used at Fort Detrick.

They had even intensively questioned his adopted children, Andrew and
Amanda, now both 24, with the authorities telling his son that he
might be able to collect the USD 2.5 million reward for solving the
case and buy a sports car, and showing his daughter gruesome
photographs of victims of the anthrax letters and telling her, "Your
father did this," according to the account Dr Ivins gave a close friend.

As the investigation wore on, some colleagues thought the FBI's
methods were increasingly coercive, as the agency tried to turn Army
scientists against one another and re-interviewed family members. One
former colleague, Dr W Russell Byrne, said the agents pressed Dr
Ivins's daughter repeatedly to acknowledge that her father was
involved in the attacks. "It was not an interview," Dr Byrne said.
"It was a frank attempt at intimidation." Dr Byrne said he believed
Dr Ivins was singled out partly because of his personal weaknesses.
"They figured he was the weakest link," Dr Byrne said. "If they had
real evidence on him, why did they not just arrest him?"

Another former co-worker, Dr Kenneth W Hedlund, who collaborated on
anthrax research with Dr Ivins in the 1980s, had a similar theory.
"The investigators looked around, they decided they had to find
somebody. They went after all of them but he looked the most
susceptible to pressure," Dr Hedlund said. "It is like prisoners of
war: if they are harassed enough, they will be driven to do anything.
But I don't believe he would have done what they say he did."

With such views voiced by Dr Ivins's acquaintances -- and vocal
skepticism from key members of Congress -- the pressure is growing on
the FBI to unveil its evidence.

Faced with the scientific mystery of the powder, government and
outside scientists first looked at chemical isotopes in the attack
strain for clues as to when and where the bacteria had been grown.
Analyzing traces of the beef broth used to grow the anthrax,
scientists measured carbon-14 left from nuclear weapons tests in the
1950s, whose quantity diminishes every year. By calculating the ratio
of carbon-14 to the normal kind in residue of plants eaten by the cow
from which the broth was made, investigators learned by June 2002
that the anthrax had been grown within the last 2 years.

A 2nd clue was developed from the new ability to sequence, or decode,
the chemical letters of DNA. Scientists at the Institute for Genomic
Research, a pioneer in genome sequencing, sequenced the full genome
of the anthrax recovered from the blood of Robert Stevens, the 1st
victim of the attacks. The genome of various stocks of the Ames
strain of anthrax used in the attacks were almost identical in all
the 5 million chemical letters of their DNA. But researchers found
enough differences in the attack strain to provide a reasonable
chance of identifying its source. The chief difference was that a
stretch of DNA was flipped head to tail in some bacteria in the
attack strain, but not in any other samples.

Further, the attack strain contained bacteria with both the flipped
and the unflipped DNA, showing that it was a mixture of 2 strains,
which analysts later found reflected a mix of origins -- 85 percent
from the Dugway Proving Ground of the Army in Utah and 15 percent
added at Fort Detrick, according to one person close to the investigation.

To make sure the case for the distinctive features of the attack
anthrax could hold up in court, agents collected thousands of samples
of Ames strain anthrax from labs around the world, said scientists
familiar with the FBI's thinking. "This is the step that took so
long," one scientist said.

Decoding the genome of a bacterium like anthrax may have cost around
USD 500 000 in 2002, and even the FBI's budget would have been
strained to decode thousands of genomes. A new generation of
sequencing machines can now sequence bacterial genomes for around USD
500. But those machines did not become available until about 2005,
which may have been another reason for the delay.

Despite speculation that the anthrax had a special coating to make it
more deadly, an FBI scientist, Douglas Beecher, published an article
in 2006 saying no such sophisticated additives had been found. That
finding broadened the number of scientists and technicians who could
have made the anthrax, another obstacle to a quick resolution.

Richard Ebright, a Rutgers University biochemist and an opponent of
the rapid expansion of biodefense research since 2001, said the FBI
should long ago have released some of its scientific conclusions.
"The finding that the attack material could be traced definitively to
a US bioweapons research lab could, and should, have been released as
soon is it was obtained," Dr Ebright said, noting that the finding
could raise questions about the wisdom of proliferating stocks of
anthrax and other pathogens. "This is not just a finding with Agatha
Christie-Perry Mason implications," he said.

[Byline: Scott Shane, Nicholas Wade]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[There is a related article by Scott Shane published on 4 Aug 2008,
"Anthrax evidence called mostly circumstantial," available at
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/04/us/04anthrax.html?ref=Washington>

We must await Wednesday's (6 Aug 2008) announced release of the FBI
evidence on Dr Ivins. - Mod.MHJ]

******
[4]
Date: 5 Aug 2008
Source: Washington Post [edited]
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/08/04/AR2008080402322.html?sid=ST2008080402359&pos=>


Anthrax Dryer a Key To Probe: Suspect Borrowed Device From Lab
--------------------------------------------------------------
Bruce E. Ivins, the government's leading suspect in the 2001 anthrax
killings, borrowed from a bioweapons lab that fall freeze-drying
equipment that allows scientists to quickly convert wet germ cultures
into dry spores, according to sources briefed on the case. Ivins's
possession of the drying device, known as a lyophilizer, could help
investigators explain how he might have been able to send letters
containing deadly anthrax spores to U.S. senators and news organizations.

The device was not commonly used by researchers at the Army's
sprawling biodefense complex at Fort Detrick, Maryland, where Ivins
worked as a scientist, employees at the base said. Instead, sources
said, Ivins had to go through a formal process to check out the
lyophilizer, creating a record on which authorities are now relying.
He did at least one project for the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency that would have given him reason to use the drying
equipment, according to a former colleague in his lab.

Ivins committed suicide last week [29 Jul 2008]. As authorities in
Washington debated yesterday how to close the long investigation of
him -- a step that would signal they think no one else is culpable in
the anthrax attacks -- more details began to emerge about the nature
of the case they developed against him. In recent months,
investigators have collected circumstantial building blocks in an
effort to establish Ivins's alleged role in the attacks, which
traumatized the nation and prompted stringent mail-handling policies.
Letters containing the anthrax spores killed 5 people, including 2
D.C. area postal workers, and sickened 17 others.

Scientific analysis helped researchers pinpoint the U.S. Army Medical
Research Institute of Infectious Diseases as the likely source of the
powder, which was the Ames strain of anthrax bacteria used in various
projects at Fort Detrick. Further testing allowed them to narrow down
the age of the substance, concluding that it had been cultivated no
more than 2 years before the attacks.

Eventually, through more elaborate DNA testing of the power and
tissue cultures from the victims, they determined that the powder
probably came from supplies made by Ivins, to which about 10 other
people had access. Authorities last week cited "new and sophisticated
scientific tools" that helped advance the investigation.

Ivins was not charged before his death 29 Jul 2008. Paul F. Kemp, his
attorney, has repeatedly asserted Ivins's innocence, and colleagues
and friends say government officials fixed on the wrong man in a race
to close a 7-year investigation rife with dead ends and missteps.
They also note that other U.S. scientists had access to some of the
same material and equipment that authorities apparently used to focus on Ivins.

The lyophilizer Ivins used in the fall of 2001 is commonly employed
by pharmaceutical companies and laboratories, as well as food
processors, to freeze a liquid broth of bacteria and quickly
transform it into a dry solid without a thawing stage. Scientists and
biodefense experts familiar with USAMRIID's procedures say that
Ivins's department rarely used such freeze-dryers, because the
researchers there worked with anthrax bacteria in a liquid form.

"Dry anthrax is much harder to work with," said one scientist
familiar with Ivins's lab. A lyophilizer would fit inside the
ventilated "biosafety cabinet" at the lab and could have been used
without drawing notice, the scientist said. The machine could have
processed a few small batches of anthrax liquid in less than a day, he said.

Other biodefense experts noted that the drying step could have been
carried out with equipment no more complicated than a kitchen oven.
"It is the simplest . . . but it is the least reproducible," said
Sergei Popov, a former Soviet bioweapons scientist who now
specializes in biodefense at George Mason University. "If you go too
fast you get 'sand,'" he said, referring to the coarser anthrax
powder used in the 1st attacks, in September 2001. [Coarser it may
have been but still lethal. - Mod.MHJ]

The 2nd batch of letters contained a much finer powder. "To me, it
all indicates that the person experimented with the ways to dry the
spores and produced small batches -- some of them not so successfully
-- he later used to fill up different envelopes," Popov said. "The
spores are naturally clumpy. As I understand, he just overbaked the
1st batches."

Many of the key documents that would have supported the prosecution
of Ivins could be unveiled this week after Justice Department and FBI
officials meet with families of the anthrax victims. Authorities were
contacting relatives yesterday and seeking a time to meet.

Investigators have been wrong before about who may have perpetrated
the attacks. In June 2008, the Justice Department agreed to pay
Steven J. Hatfill, a former Fort Detrick researcher once labeled a
"person of interest" in the case, a USD 5.8 million settlement to
forgo a privacy lawsuit.

Significant mysteries remain, including whether the attacks that
involved letters mailed from Florida and Princeton, New Jersey, could
have been carried out by one person. And many questions remain about
Ivins. Safety officials and lawmakers have wondered how the scientist
was able to maintain his security clearance despite emotional
problems that led a therapist to seek a protective order against him
last month [July 2008]. The Army issued final rules last week that
would cover workers who act in an aggressive or threatening manner.
Those employees would be denied access to toxic or lethal biological
agents under the revised regulations. Other potentially disqualifying
personality traits include "arrogance, inflexibility, suspiciousness,
hostility . . . and extreme moods or mood swings," according to the
document. A spokeswoman for USAMRID said Fort Detrick had been
operating under interim rules covering the same behavior for some time.

[Byline: Carrie Johnson, Joby Warrick and Marilyn W. Thompson and
staff writers Del Quentin Wilber, Michael S. Rosenwald and Mary Beth
Sheridan and staff researcher Julie Tate contributed to this report.]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Still speculative. Ivins had a formally agreed reason to check out
this lyopholizer from wherever it was stored and its use was
documented. The evidence is still circumstantial. As scientists we
spend a majority of our time trying to prove our choice hypotheses
wrong. Assuming for the moment that the FBI is mistaken and Bruce was
innocent, what would he need to show to prove it? A depressing
situation to be in if innocent. - Mod MHJ]
See Also
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (02): letters, evidence 20080805.2392
Anthrax, human - USA 2001: letters, new suspect 20080803.2371
2002
----
Anthrax, human - USA: 2001 review 20020920.5367
...................................jw/mhj/mj/lm/jw/ejp/mpp

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
