<header id=033586>
Published Date: 2011-10-09 17:38:10 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed deaths, equine - Australia
Archive Number: 20111009.3029
</header>
<body id=033586>
UNDIAGNOSED DEATHS, EQUINE - AUSTRALIA
**************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: 7 Oct 2011
Source: ABC.net.au [edited]
http://www.abc.net.au/lateline/content/2011/s3335171.htm


Seven horses have died, and 5 others have been euthanised at a
property west of the Gold Coast, leading to suggestions of poisoning.


Authorities were called to Kooralbyn agistment [pasture land] after
neighbors reported seeing a paddock of horses struggling to breathe.

Twelve horses dead within a day. Owner Steve Hogno is devastated. The
owner stated he had shed a few tears.

Neighbours found the sick animals yesterday [6 Sep 2011] and called
authorities. But they say it took hours for vets to arrive, and the
horses suffered agonising deaths. [Unfortunately, animals and
veterinarians are not always in the same location. It takes time to
gather equipment and then travel to the premises. The veterinarians
did not know what they were facing, perhaps the deadly Hendra virus,
and likely had to gather extra protective equipment. The article does
not tell us how far away the veterinarians were, or what the
veterinarians were engaged in prior to departing for the location of
the horses. - Mod.TG]

The neighbor reported the animals' tongues hanging out of their
mouths. "It's really just drowning in their own fluids. It was
horrible."

The owner moved his 25 race horses from Toowoomba to the agistment
property at Korralbyn 10 days ago. He flew back from work in Western
Australia this morning [7 Sep 2011] as soon as he heard they were
sick.

The owner reports his horses were the cream of the crop and the
youngest ones, which is devastating. 13 horses remain. Three of those
are being monitored for the sickness.

The owner doesn't think that they're going to die, but they do need
treatment. And we need to know what's happened to the other ones.

Kooralbyn is near Boonah and Beaudesert, where a number of horses died
of Hendra virus earlier this year [2011]. But Biosecurity Queensland
tests have confirmed the 12 horses didn't have the disease.

The owner indicates that it may be some sort of poisoning. They do
have a few ticks on them, but it doesn't seem to be heavy enough
infestation to kill them so quickly.

The RSPCA was called to the property, but it has ruled out animal
mistreatment.

The deaths will remain a mystery until the post-mortem results are
released next week.

[Byline: Imogen Brennan]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: 8 Oct 2011
Source: French Tribune [edited]
http://www.frenchtribune.com/teneur/117621-17-horses-died-kooralbyn-property


One more horse is being doubted of having a low chance of survival
from the unidentified disease which has already victimized 17 horses
at a property near Beaudesert in the Kooralbyn region.

The owner of the property has called for the vet, who is supposed to
be on his way to the property. According to the owner, the horse was
fine and was healing out of weariness on Friday [7 Sep 2011]. She was
having food properly and also drank sufficient water, but in the
morning again, she seemed to be unwell. The owner doubts that horse
will have to be euthanized like the other 17 horses.

The vets doubt that these horses were hit by Hendra virus. Some of the
dead horses have been sent for medical examination, and their results
are not expected to arrive before Tuesday [11 Sep 2011].

Initially, 5 horses were found severely ill, then the infection spread
to another 3 fillies and mares; they all were infected at the
compound. Five horses have died, and another 3 have been euthanized by
the vets in order to stop the spread of infection. [At the moment, we
do not know whether it is infectious or toxic, so the article may be
somewhat misleading. It may also be that the animals were euthanized
out of humane care. - Mod.TG]

As per the owner, "They have a few ticks on them, but I don't think,
and the vets agree, that it's enough to do the damage that's been
done."

[Byline: Nimisha Sachdev]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[These articles are one day apart and report different numbers. Either
more horses have succumbed to the situation, or there is a miscount
from one of these articles.

We are not told whether there are other horses on nearby properties.
Consequently, we do not know whether this is an infectious disease.
However, the animals appear to be new to the area, as the owner just
moved them there 10 days prior to this incident. If this is a toxic
plant, then horses familiar with the area are less likely to consume
it. Naive animals, hungry animals and thirsty animals are those most
often poisoned by toxic plants. These horses may be naive to the area,
or may not have known exactly where water is located. It is quite
impossible to say without more information than these articles
provide.

We will look forward to the results of the necropsy. - Mod.TG]

.................................................sb/tg/msp
</body>
