<header id=033393>
Published Date: 2010-07-27 15:00:05 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Vancomycin resistant enterococci - Sweden
Archive Number: 20100727.2515
</header>
<body id=033393>
VANCOMYCIN RESISTANT ENTEROCOCCI - SWEDEN
*****************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Thu 22 Jul 2010
Source: Eurosurveillance edition 2010; 15(29) [edited]
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19620>


Alarming spread of vancomycin resistant enterococci in Sweden since 2007
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[Authors: T Soderblom, O Aspevall, M Erntell, G Hedin, et al.]

The total number of persons infected or colonised with vancomycin
resistant enterococci mandatorily reported to the Swedish Institute
for Infectious Disease Control increased dramatically during 2007 and
2008. During a period of 20 months from 1 Jul 2007 to 28 Feb 2009, a
total of 760 cases were reported compared with 194 cases reported
during the entire period from 2000 to 2006.

This rise was mainly attributed to a wide dissemination of vancomycin
resistant enterococci, which started in a number of hospitals in
Stockholm in the autumn of 2007 and was followed by dissemination in
various healthcare facilities (hospitals and homes for the elderly) in
a further 2 Swedish counties in 2008. The majority of the cases (97
percent) were acquired in Sweden and among these, healthcare-acquired
_Enterococcus faecium_ vanB dominated (n=634). The majority of these
isolates had identical or closely related pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis patterns indicating clonal dissemination in the
affected counties. The median minimum inhibitory concentration of
vancomycin was 32 mg/L (ranging from 4 to more than 128 mg/L) and of
teicoplanin 0.12 mg/L (ranging from 0.06 to 0.25 mg/L).

Particular emphasis was placed on countermeasures such as screening,
contact tracing, cleaning procedures, education in accurate use of
infection control practices, as well as increasing awareness of
hygiene among patients and visitors. With these measures the
dissemination rate decreased substantially, but new infections with
the _E. faecium_ vanB strain were still detected.

Introduction
------------
Enterococci may acquire various types of glycopeptide antibiotic
resistance via van-associated genetic elements (vanA/B/D/E/G/L), of
which vanA and vanB are the most prevalent in clinically relevant
species (1,2). Although vancomycin-resistant enterococci are seldom
encountered in serious clinical infections, they occasionally cause
invasive infections notably in immunocompromised hosts. Some of these
infections, particularly those caused by _E. faecium_, are often
difficult to treat since only few antimicrobial treatment options are
available. Vancomycin-resistant _E. faecium_ and _E. faecalis_
(referred to as VRE throughout this paper) became mandatorily
notifiable according to the Swedish Communicable Diseases Act in
January 2000, and in 2004 an amendment concerning mandatory contact
tracing was added.

According to studies performed in the late 1990s the prevalence of VRE
in Sweden was low in the community and in healthcare facilities (3,4)
and remained so until the year 2006 with no more than 0.2-0.4 cases
per 100 000 inhabitants and year (5). Only a few minor
healthcare-related outbreaks involving less than 20 patients each
occurred during that period (6,7). The prevalence of VRE among
invasive _E. faecium_ blood isolates in Sweden as reported to the
European antimicrobial resistance surveillance system (EARSS; data
representing more than 75 percent of the population) was generally
less than 1 percent for most of the period from 2001 to 2006 (8). This
prevalence is clearly lower than reported from some other European
countries (8,9).

In the autumn of 2007, there was a distinct increase in the number of
persons infected or colonised with VRE as reported from various
hospitals in Stockholm County. During 2008, this increase was also
noted in 2 other counties, Vastmanland and Halland, and the total
number of reports increased more than 10-fold between 2007 and 2008,
showing little or no tendency to decrease during the 1st months of
2009. The aim of this study was to describe the epidemiology of the
dissemination of VRE in the affected counties.

Methods
-------
National surveillance system for vancomycin-resistant enterococci.
In Sweden, contact tracing is performed whenever VRE is detected in a
clinical sample. Furthermore, screening for VRE is recommended in all
patients who have recently received any medical treatment abroad. A
case of VRE is defined as a person with a clinical VRE infection or a
person colonised with VRE.

All cases of VRE are mandatorily reported via the national
internet-based reporting system SmiNet2 (10). Case reports are created
in this system combining information from the laboratory notification
on species and van gene with the clinical notification from the
treating physician, which contains epidemiological information on
country of acquisition, route of transmission and reason for sampling.
The descriptive epidemiology of the cases presented in this report is
based on data from SmiNet2 covering the period from 1 Jul 2007 to 28
Feb 2009. The primary information from the clinical notifications was
reviewed and complemented with additional information collected during
our investigation in collaboration with the County Departments of
Communicable Disease Control, infection control teams and the regional
clinical microbiological laboratories.

Identification and susceptibility testing of vancomycin-resistant enterococci.
A preliminary diagnosis of VRE in a clinical sample is based on
standard methods for culture, species identification and
susceptibility testing. Guidelines for susceptibility testing are
provided by the Swedish Reference Group for Antibiotics and are
followed by the clinical laboratories (11). It is recommended that all
enterococci are tested for susceptibility to vancomycin and that
results are reported back to the clinician for treatment guidance. The
preliminary diagnosis of VRE is subsequently verified using genotypic
(PCR-based) methods identifying the van genes (12). Phenotypic
detection of vancomycin-resistant _E. faecium_ or _E. faecalis_,
combined with detection of genetic resistance markers in the isolate
constitutes the Swedish case definition for notifiable VRE infections
and colonisations.

Contact tracing and screening are done by sampling from faeces and, if
applicable, from insertion sites of indwelling catheters and catheter
urine, and sometimes also from apparent infection sites on skin and
soft tissue. The samples are cultured over night in broth containing
vancomycin 4 mg/ L (13), followed by detection through phenotypic or
genotypic (PCR-based) methods. Before 2009 some Swedish laboratories
used selective broth containing higher vancomycin concentrations 32
mg/L, designed for detection of enterococci with the vanA gene.

During the present investigation, all VRE isolates (with the exception
of the majority of isolates from Stockholm County) were submitted to
the Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease Control
(Smittskyddsinstitutet, SMI) for genetic confirmation of van genes and
species-specific ddl genes (12). VRE isolates from Stockholm were
investigated using identical methods at the Department of Clinical
Microbiology and Infection Control, Huddinge, and representative
isolates were also analysed at SMI.

Epidemiological typing.
Epidemiological typing was performed using pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE). Mapping of SmaI-digested DNA was performed
according to standard procedures for PFGE (14), using the CHEF Mapper
XA system (Bio-Rad Laboratories) set at 6 V/cm. PFGE patterns,
comprising bands within the size range 48-400 kb, were analysed and
compared using BioNumerics software (version 5.01, Applied Maths). The
Dice coefficient was used for pair-wise comparisons of patterns, and
the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) for
pattern groupings. Position tolerance and optimisation were both set
at 1 percent. PFGE band patterns were defined as identical (100
percent pair-wise Dice similarity), closely related (more than 90
percent pair-wise Dice similarity) or unrelated (less than 90 percent
pair-wise Dice similarity).

Results
-------
During the period from 1 Jul 2007 to 28 Feb 2009, a total of 760 VRE
cases were reported nationally via SmiNet2 from 13 of 21 Swedish
counties, including 493 from Stockholm, 128 from Vastmanland, and 100
from Halland. The majority of the persons (n=738, 97.1 percent) had
acquired VRE in Sweden. These 738 domestic cases were notified from 10
counties, and _E. faecium_ vanB was the most commonly reported strain
(n=634, 85.9 percent).

Of the 634 _E. faecium_ vanB cases reported, 610 (96 percent) were
healthcare-related. Spread of __E. faecium_ vanB was reported in
several hospitals in the affected counties as well as homes for the
elderly. The mean age of the 610 domestic healthcare-related cases
with _E. faecium_ vanB was 72 years for females (range 1-98 years,
n=291) and 68 years for males (range 22-96 years, n=319).

Reason for sampling and site of isolation.
Of the 610 healthcare-related domestic _E. faecium_ vanB cases
reported, 52 (8.5 percent), had clinical infections and 494 were
colonised. Of these 494, 410 (67 percent) were identified through
contact tracing and 84 (14 percent) through screening. In 64 (10.5
percent) of the 610 cases there were miscellaneous, or unknown,
reasons for sampling.

According to the 1st laboratory notifications for each case, the
majority of VRE (85 percent) were isolated from faecal samples, and 5
percent each from wound and urine samples. The remaining 5 percent
were collected from various other sampling sites. Blood-stream
infections caused by VRE were reported for 15 cases during the period
from 1 Jul 2007 to 28 Feb 2009.

Clonal dissemination of _E. faecium_ vanB.
All examined isolates (n=226) of _E. faecium_ vanB from the counties
of Vastmanland and Halland and 93 percent of the isolates from
Stockholm County gathered during the study period, had identical or
closely related PFGE patterns indicating a clonal dissemination. Ten
isolates of this _E. faecium_ vanB were identified as the cause of
invasive bloodstream infections. The isolates had a MIC [minimum
inhibitory concentration] of vancomycin ranging from 4 mg/L to more
than 128 mg/L (median value: 32 mg/L, with 80 percent of the isolates
in the range 16-64 mg/L) and a median MIC for teicoplanin of 0.125
mg/L (range: 0.064-0.25 mg/L). The isolates were resistant to
ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, and macrolides and exhibited low-level
resistance to gentamicin. Susceptibility testing for linezolid,
tigecycline, daptomycin, and quinupristin/dalfopristin was performed
on a few of the isolates. However, resistance to linezolid and
tigecycline was never recorded, while varying susceptibility profiles
were recorded for the other two compounds.

Discussion and conclusion
-------------------------
Our report describes a current strong increase in mandatorily reported
cases of VRE in healthcare facilities in 3 geographically separate
regions of Sweden, that is, the counties of Stockholm, Vastmanland,
and Halland. This increase was largely characterised by clonal
dissemination of an _E. faecium_ vanB strain as revealed by contact
tracing and screening performed in connection with VRE infections
detected in healthcare facilities in these counties. The cause of the
dissemination is unknown, and no major changes in the general hospital
infection control policies such as changes of nurses/bed ratios or
antibiotic policies had been introduced that could explain the
increased VRE prevalence.

The 3 counties accounted for the majority of all domestic cases of VRE
reported to the SMI during a period of 20 months from July 2007 to
February 2009. Despite the marked geographical separation between
these counties, the _E. faecium_ vanB isolates were apparently
genetically closely related according to the typing results of the
isolates. The PFGE pattern of the current strain is seemingly new and
has not been seen previously among vancomycin-resistant _E. faecium_
isolates in Sweden. Moreover, when compared to PFGE-patterns of a
large collection of VRE isolates in Germany, a pattern corresponding
to that of this Swedish strain could not be identified (G Werner,
personal communication, 2009). Investigations to find possible links
to vancomycin-susceptible _E. faecium_ isolates are ongoing, including
Multilocus sequence typing (MLST), since such connections have been
described in other outbreak situations (15).

No apparent epidemiological link between the 3 major affected counties
has been identified. Still, some patient exchange does take place
between the involved counties, hence a possible epidemiological link
involving patients whose VRE-positive status was undetected cannot be
excluded.

More than 80 percent of the healthcare-associated cases with _E.
faecium_ vanB were identified through contact tracing or screening,
and only 9 percent had a clinical infection. This proportion of
clinical infections versus colonisations is in accordance with that
reported in a previous outbreak report in Finland (15). During the
study period, 15 of our patients were reported to have a bloodstream
infection caused by VRE, 10 of which had _E. faecium_ vanB. This
compares to a total of 19 bloodstream infections caused by VRE
notified in SmiNet2 during the entire period from 2000 to 2006.

The methods used for microbiological processing of the samples
obtained from contact tracing and screening for VRE were optimised
during the study period (unpublished data). The reference methodology
previously endorsed in Sweden, published by the Swedish Society of
Medicine and SMI (16), was designed for the selective isolation and
identification of the vanA phenotype and therefore included an
enrichment broth containing 32 mg/L of vancomycin. Since MICs of
vancomycin for the present _E. faecium_ vanB isolates ranged between 4
mg/L and more than 128 mg/L, laboratories using this methodology for
VRE screening might have failed to detect some of the strains
belonging to the currently spreading vanB strain, especially in
samples with low numbers of VRE. However, as the majority of the
isolates (approximately 80 percent) had MICs ranging between 16 mg/L
and 64 mg/L, it is most likely that only few isolates remained
undetected due to an unsuitably high vancomycin concentration. Low
sensitivity of the laboratory screening method may, however,
contribute to the maintenance of undetected dissemination of
moderately resistant strains. As a consequence, all Swedish
microbiological laboratories have been advised since January 2009 to
decrease the vancomycin concentrations in the enrichment broth to 4
mg/L.

The present situation regarding healthcare-associated dissemination of
VRE urged the SMI, the Swedish Strategic Programme against antibiotic
resistance (Strama) and the National Board of Health and Welfare
(NBHW) to initiate a working group with representatives from the
County Departments of Communicable Disease Control, infection control
teams, and the regional clinical microbiological laboratories in the
spring of 2008. The group organised a workshop in December 2008, in
which also the National Veterinary Institute participated. They
discussed the countermeasures taken so far as well as additional steps
needed to stop the spreading of VRE in Swedish healthcare facilities.
The workshop was followed by a national one-day educational VRE
conference arranged by the SMI. In December 2008, the NBHW
commissioned their Central Field Epidemiology Group (CFG) to review
the outbreaks, to map the VRE-screening capacities of the
microbiological laboratories during an outbreak situation and to
suggest actions in order to improve the national coordination of
actions to be taken in order to contain the ongoing dissemination of
VRE. The report of the CFG formed the basis for a national action plan
which is in preparation.

Experiences from the affected healthcare facilities demonstrated that
VRE may be found at scattered places in the environment of the wards.
It has also proved important to meticulously follow the local cleaning
instructions to eradicate VRE from the environment. Intense
educational efforts have been taken to persuade the ward personal to
follow the basic infection control practices stated by Swedish law
(17). In addition, local educational efforts to increase awareness of
hygiene among patients and hospital visitors have been made. Food
buffets in the affected hospitals have been removed, and probiotic
treatment using yoghurt supplemented with _Lactobacillus rhamnosus_,
has been offered to patients in affected wards (18).

This report describes the largest known, to date, dissemination of VRE
in healthcare settings in Sweden. Although occurring in geographically
separate counties, the bacteria share the same PFGE pattern indicating
a clonal origin. Vigorous counter measures were taken in order to
prevent further local and national spreading of these bacteria. Owing
to these measures the rate of new cases decreased substantially, but
new cases carrying the _E. faecium_ vanB strain were still detected.

References
----------
1. Courvalin P: Vancomycin resistance in gram-positive cocci. Clin
Infect Dis. 2006; 42 Suppl. 1: 25-34 [available from
<http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/491711>].
2. Boyd DA, Willey BM, Fawcett D, et al: Molecular characterization of
_Enterococcus faecalis_ N06-0364 with low level vancomycin resistance
harbouring a novel D-Ala-D-Ser cluster, vanL. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother. 2008; 52(7): 2667-72 [available from
<http://aac.asm.org/cgi/content/full/52/7/2667?view=long&pmid=18458129>].
3. Torell E, Cars O, Olsson-Liljequist B, et al: Near absence of
vancomycin-resistant enterococci but high carriage rates of
quinolone-resistant ampicillin-resistant enterococci among
hospitalized patients and nonhospitalized individuals in Sweden. J
Clin Microbiol. 1999; 37(11): 3509-13 [available from
<http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/content/full/37/11/3509?view=long&pmid=10523543>].
4. Olofsson MB, Pornull KJ, Karnell A, et al: Fecal carriage of
vancomycin- and ampicillin-resistant enterococci observed in Swedish
adult patients with diarrhea but not among healthy subjects. Scand J
Infect Dis. 2001; 33(9): 659-62 [abstract available from
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11669222>].
5. Swedish Institute of Infectious Disease Control (SMI).
Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcal infection (VRE). Stockholm: SMI.
Updated 13 Jul 2010. Available from
<http://www.smittskyddsinstitutet.se/in-english/statistics/vancomycin-resistant-enterococc-infection-vre/>.
Swedish.
6. Torell E, Fredlund H, Tornquist E, et al: Intrahospital spread of
vancomycin-resistant _Enterococcus faecium_ in Sweden. Scand J Infect
Dis. 1997; 29(3): 259-63 [abstract available from
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9255886>].
7. Granlund M, Carlsson C, Edebro H, et al: Nosocomial outbreak of
vanB2 vancomycin-resistant _Enterococcus faecium_ in Sweden. J Hosp
Infect 2006; 62(2): 254-6.
8. The European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (EARSS).
Reports and Articles. Bilthoven: Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid
en Milieu (RIVM). Available from
<http://www.rivm.nl/earss/result/Monitoring_reports/>.
9. Werner G, Coque TM, Hammerum AM, et al: Emergence and spread of
vancomycin resistance among enterococci in Europe. Euro Surveill.
2008; 13(47): pii=19046. Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19046>.
10. Rolfhamre P, Janson A, Arneborn M, Ekdahl K. SmiNet-2: Description
of an internet-based surveillance system for communicable diseases in
Sweden. Euro Surveill. 2006;11(5):pii=626. Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=626>.
11. The Swedish Reference Group for Antibiotics: Enterococci. Updated
28 Apr 2009. Available from
<http://www.srga.org/FOTNOT/FOTEFEF.HTM>.
12. Dutka-Malen S, Evers S, Courvalin P: Detection of glycopeptide
resistance genotypes and identification to the species level of
clinically relevant enterococci by PCR. J Clin Microbiol. 1995; 33(1):
24-7 [available from
<http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/reprint/33/1/24?view=long&pmid=7699051>].
13. The Swedish Reference Group for Antibiotics. [Multiresistant
bacteria in Swedish healthcare -- for staff in microbiological
laboratories]. Available from
<http://www.srga.org/MRB/index-lab.htm>. Swedish.
14. Maslow J, Slutsky A, Arbeit R: Application of pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis to molecular epidemiology. In: Persing D, Smith T,
Tenover F, White T, editors. Diagnostic molecular microbiology:
principles and applications. Washington, DC: ASM Press; 1993: 563-72.
15. Suppola JP, Kolho E, Salmenlinna S, et al: vanA and vanB
incorporate into an endemic ampicillin-resistant vancomycin-sensitive
_Enterococcus faecium_ strain: effect on interpretation of clonality.
J Clin Microbiol. 1999; 37(12): 3934-9 [available from
<http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/content/full/37/12/3934>].
16. Swedish Institute of Infectious Disease Control (SMI) and Swedish
Society of Medicine. [Reference methodology for diagnostics of
infections of the skin, soft tissue, skeleton, and inner organs]. In:
I 11. [Reference methodology for clinical microbiological
laboratories]. Stockholm: SMI; 2003. Available from
<http://referensmetodik.smi.se/w/Bilaga_1:_Substratrecept-_Hud,_mjukdelar,_skelett_och_inre_organ>.
Swedish.
17. Socialstyrelsen. [National Board of Health regulations on basic
hygiene in health care, etc.] Stockholm: Socialstyrelsen; December
2007. Available from: <http://www.socialstyrelsen.se/sosfs/2007-19>.
Swedish.
18. Manley KJ, Fraenkel MB, Mayall BC, Power DA: Probiotic treatment
of vancomycin resistant enterococci; a randomised controlled trial.
Med J Aust. 2007; 186(9): 454-7 [available from
<http://www.mja.com.au/public/issues/186_09_070507/man10966_fm.html>].

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Enterococci are Gram-positive cocci that normally inhabit the lower
gastrointestinal tract. They commonly cause community-acquired and
nosocomial infections, which include urinary tract infection, biliary
sepsis, and other intra-abdominal infections, wound infections,
bacteremia, and endocarditis. The most common enterococcal pathogens
are _Enterococcus faecalis_ and _Enterococcus faecium_.

Enterococci have become very successful nosocomial pathogens because
of their resistance to several commonly used antibiotics. Antibiotic
resistance in enterococci is both intrinsic (that is, a species
characteristic) and acquired either by mutation or by receipt of
mobile foreign genetic material through the transfer of plasmids and
transposons. Vancomycin was once relied on for the treatment of
infections caused by multidrug-resistant enterococci. However,
vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) have become increasingly common
since they were first detected in the mid 1980's in Europe and soon
thereafter in the USA. In 2002, according to National Nosocomial
Infections Surveillance (NNIS) data from the USA, almost 28 percent of
enterococcal isolates from patients in intensive care units were
vancomycin-resistant
(<http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/nnis/2003NNISReport_AJIC.PDF>).

_E. faecium_ is more common than _E. faecalis_ among VRE, whereas _E.
faecalis_ is more common overall, and clonal spread is noted to be
common among VRE isolates (LM Deshpande et al: Antimicrobial
resistance and molecular epidemiology of vancomycin-resistant
enterococci from North America and Europe: a report from the SENTRY
antimicrobial surveillance program Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2007;
58(2): 163-70; abstract available from
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17368801>).

Of note, a particular hospital-adapted, ampicillin-resistant _E.
faecium_ clonal complex 17 (CC-17) based on multilocus sequence typing
(MLST) has disseminated globally (Willems RJ, et al: Global spread of
vancomycin-resistant _Enterococcus faecium_ from distinct nosocomial
genetic complex. Emerg Infect Dis 2005; 11(6): 821-8; available from
<http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol11no06/04-1204.htm>).

Characteristic features of this hospital-adapted _E. faecium_ clone in
addition to ampicillin resistance are high-level fluoroquinolone
resistance and certain virulence markers. Acquisition of glycopeptide
resistance gene clusters is thought to have occurred as a final step
in this already hospital-adapted clonal complex.

Of the several genotypes of vancomycin resistance, vanA and vanB are
most common as they are located on mobile genetic elements that can
readily move between enterococci. VanA strains have high MICs [Minimum
inhibitory concentrations] to both vancomycin and another related
antibiotic teicoplanin; vanB strains have moderate to high MICs to
vancomycin and are susceptible to teicoplanin (only vancomycin, but
not teicoplanin, is an inducer of the vanB cluster).

In European countries that used avoparcin, a member of the class of
antibiotics (glycopeptides) to which vancomycin belongs, in animal
feed as a growth promoter, fecal carriage of VRE in the community is
much higher than in European countries and the USA that never used
glycopeptides in animal feed for growth promotion. In the USA, VRE has
been much more common in hospitals than in the community
(<http://aac.asm.org/cgi/reprint/43/9/2215?ijkey=b39281409138119765198d167a970a6cc9c0a989>;
<http://jac.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/46/1/146>).

Sweden banned the use of all antibiotics as growth promoters in 1986
(<http://jac.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/46/1/146#R1>) and no
VRE have been found in the faecal flora of animals, foods of animal
origin, or in healthy humans from the general population
(<http://jac.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/46/1/146#R1>).

In a 1999 Swedish study, only one of 670 non-hospitalized persons
harbored VRE (vanA), which was presumably acquired abroad -- and only
about 1 percent of 841 hospitalized patients were fecal carriers of
VRE (VanB gene); but 21.5 percent of hospitalized patients were found
to be carriers of ampicillin/ fluoroquinolone-resistant enterococci
(<http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/content/abstract/37/11/3509>).

Neither the nosocomial ampicillin/fluoroquinolone-resistant
enterococci in the 1999 Swedish study, nor the nosocomial
ampicillin/fluoroquinolone/vancomycin-resistant clone in the
Eurosurveillance study above have been characterized by multilocus
sequence typing; however, these organisms might be the
hospital-adapted _E. faecium_ CC17.

The HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Sweden can be accessed at
<http://healthmap.org/r/01cP>. - Mod.ML]
See Also
1999
----
Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus - Japan 19990804.1334
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci - Australia 19990529.0906
1997
----
Vancomycin res. cocci, poultry to human transfer (05) 19971129.2383
Vancomycin resistant cocci, poultry to human transfer (04) 19971129.2377
Vancomycin resistant cocci, poultry to human transfer (03) 19971125.2365
Vancomycin resistant cocci, poultry to human transfer (02) 19971124.2355
Vancomycin resistant cocci, poultry to human transfer 19971122.2348
1996
----
Vancomycin dependent enterococcus - UK (02) 19961207.2019
Vancomycin dependent Enterococcus - UK 19961206.2013
........................................ml/mj/jw
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at:
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Donations.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to
an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name
name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub-
scribe at <http://www.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.lasso>.
For assistance from a human being, send mail to:
<postmaster@promedmail.org>.
############################################################
############################################################
</body>
