<header id=050134>
Published Date: 2007-03-15 17:00:02 EDT
Subject: Rotavirus vaccine, intussusception (02): active surveillance
Archive Number: 20070315.0917
</header>
<body id=050134>
ROTAVIRUS VACCINE, INTUSSUSCEPTION (02): ACTIVE SURVEILLANCE
*********************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 15 Mar 2007
From: ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>
Source: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2007; 56(10): 218-222 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5610a3.htm?s_cid=mm5610a3e


[Please note that all Tables and Figures referred to in the body of
the text below can be accessed at the URL link provided for the MMWR
article above. - Mod.MPP]

Postmarketing monitoring of intussusception after RotaTeq (TM)
vaccination -- United States, 1 Feb 2006-15 Feb 2007
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Rotavirus is the leading cause of severe gastroenteritis in children
aged less than 5 years worldwide. In February 2006, a new rotavirus
vaccine, RotaTeq (Merck and Co., West Point, Pennsylvania), was
licensed in the United States, and the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommended it for routine vaccination
of U.S. infants with 3 doses, administered orally at ages 2, 4, and 6
months (1). Because a previous rotavirus vaccine, Rotashield (Wyeth
Laboratories, Marietta, Pennsylvania), was withdrawn from the U.S.
market in 1999 after postmarketing surveillance identified an
association* with intussusception (a rare type of bowel obstruction)
(2), the safety of RotaTeq was evaluated in a prelicensure clinical
trial involving 71 725 infants who received either vaccine or placebo
(3). In this controlled trial, no statistically significant elevated
risk for intussusception was observed within a 42-day period after
RotaTeq vaccination. However, postmarketing monitoring for
intussusception after RotaTeq vaccination is necessary because of
possible differences in the characteristics of infants who received
the vaccine in routine use compared with the infants in the clinical
trials. Also, the large numbers of infants being vaccinated provides
an opportunity to detect intussusception occurring at a low rate
after vaccination.

This report presents data from the 1st year of postmarketing
monitoring for intussusception after RotaTeq vaccination in the
United States, with particular focus on all intussusception reports
received by the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) during
the period 1 Feb 2006-15 Feb 2007. As of 15 Feb 2007, postmarketing
surveillance did not suggest association of RotaTeq vaccination with
intussusception. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) reaffirm
vaccine policy recommendations to routinely vaccinate U.S. infants
with RotaTeq at ages 2, 4, and 6 months.

In the United States, the postmarketing safety of RotaTeq is being
monitored jointly by CDC and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
through both evaluation of reports to VAERS and active surveillance
using data from the Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD) (4,5). Merck and
Co. also is conducting a postmarketing observational study, which
will monitor for occurrence of intussusception within 30 days of
RotaTeq vaccination in 44 000 infants in the United States. VAERS is
a passive national surveillance system that receives reports of
adverse events after vaccination from various sources, including
vaccine manufacturers, health-care providers, immunization programs,
and vaccine recipients (4). VAERS reports of serious adverse events
after RotaTeq vaccination are reviewed daily by staff physicians and
epidemiologists at CDC and FDA. Health-care providers are contacted
to verify diagnoses and obtain additional clinical information and
vaccination history. VSD is a collaborative project between CDC and
several large U.S. health maintenance organizations (HMOs) in which
computerized vaccination data can be linked to medical outcomes (5).
Because of the limited number of administered doses of RotaTeq
vaccine reported in VSD to date, this analysis focused on VAERS data.

To assess a potential association between intussusception and RotaTeq
vaccination, the number of intussusception reports to VAERS after
RotaTeq vaccination was compared with the number of intussusception
cases expected to occur by chance alone (that is, the background
cases of intussusception). Because the background rates of natural
intussusception and number of vaccine doses administered vary
substantially by age, the analysis was stratified into 3 age groups
(6-14 weeks, 15-23 weeks, and 24-35 weeks). The observed reports of
intussusception were compared with the expected number of cases of
intussusception for the 3 age groups within 1-21 days and 1-7 days
after RotaTeq vaccination. These periods were selected on the basis
of the potential risk periods identified from experience with
Rotashield and the hypothesis that any possible risk of
intussusception requires replication of the vaccine virus in the
intestinal tract, which might occur 1-15 days after vaccination, on
the basis of the RotaTeq clinical trials (1-3).

The background rates of intussusception for the 3 age groups were
determined from hospital discharges coded with the International
Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision code for intussusception
(560.0) at the VSD study sites for 2000-2004, when no rotavirus
vaccine was in use. The expected number of background cases for risk
periods of 1-21 days and 1-7 days were calculated by multiplying the
VSD background rates of intussusception for each age group by the
estimated number of vaccine doses administered to that age group. For
these calculations, the following was assumed:
- administered doses of vaccine approximated the total number of
doses of RotaTeq distributed by the manufacturer during 1 Feb 2006-31
Jan 2007; and
- the national distribution of vaccine doses to infants in these 3
age groups approximated the distribution of vaccine doses
administered in each of the 3 age groups in VSD.

Observed versus expected reporting rate ratios (RRs) with 95 percent
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using the exact
age-stratified Poisson test.

VAERS reports
-------------
During February 1, 2006-February 15, 2007, VAERS received 567 reports
of adverse events after RotaTeq vaccination, including 35 reports of
intussusception (Figure 1) that were confirmed using the Brighton
Collaboration case definition (6). Of these 35 reports, 17 (49
percent) occurred in infants within 1-21 days of vaccination,
including 11 (31 percent) that occurred within 1-7 days of
vaccination. Among the other 18 reports, onset of intussusception
ranged from 22-73 days, with the exception of one report, with onset
on the same day as vaccination (Figure 1).

All 17 intussusception reports occurring within 1-21 days of
vaccination were radiographically confirmed (that is, by barium enema
or ultrasonogram). Of these 17 cases, 9 (53 percent) occurred in
vaccinees after dose 1, 8 (47 percent) after dose 2, and none after
dose 3 of vaccine (Figure 2). Ten (59%) infants required surgery
(including 5 who needed intestinal resection); for 7 (41 percent)
infants, intussusception was resolved by enema reduction or resolved
spontaneously (Table 1).

Observed vs expected calculations
---------------------------------
As of 31 Jan 2007, the manufacturer had distributed 3.6 million doses
of RotaTeq (Merck, unpublished data, 2007). According to VSD data, an
estimated 57 percent, 31 percent, and 12 percent of these doses had
been distributed among infants aged 6-14, 15-23, and 24-35 weeks,
respectively; an estimated 61 percent were dose 1, 30 percent were
dose 2, and 9 percent were dose 3. Using VSD data for 2000-2004, the
background rate of intussusception was 18.1 per 100 000 person years
(PY) at ages 6-14 weeks, 32.5 per 100 000 PY at ages 15-23 weeks, and
42.5 per 100 000 PY at ages 24-35 weeks. By applying these background
intussusception rates to the estimated distributed doses per age
group, an expected number of 52 intussusception cases was calculated
for the period 1-21 days after vaccination; 17 of these cases would
be expected to occur at 1-7 days after vaccination. In contrast, 17
intussusception cases were reported to VAERS that occurred within
1-21 days after vaccination, including 11 that occurred 1-7 days
after vaccination. Thus, the number of cases of intussusception
reported through VAERS was not elevated above the age-adjusted
background rates of intussusception for either 1-21 days (RR = 0.32;
CI = 0.17-0.55) or 1-7 days (RR = 0.61; CI = 0.29-1.18) after RotaTeq
vaccination (Table 2).

VSD results
-----------
During 1 Feb 2006-15 Feb 2007, a total of 28 377 doses of RotaTeq
were administered to infants in VSD-monitored HMOs. No cases of
intussusception within 30 days of vaccination were reported among
these recipients. In contrast, during the same period, within 30 days
of vaccination, 8 cases of intussusception were reported among
approximately 240 110 infants of the same age group who received
vaccines other than RotaTeq.

[Byline: E Belongia, H Izurieta, MM Braun, et al]

MMWR editorial note
-------------------
Intussusception is the most common cause of acute intestinal
obstruction in infants aged less than 1 year. Although many
etiologies have been associated with intussusception (such as,
adenovirus infection or Meckel's diverticulum), the cause is often
unknown. In the United States, approximately 1200-1400 cases of
intussusception occur annually, even in the absence of rotavirus
vaccination (7). Using surveillance data to ascertain whether RotaTeq
is associated with intussusception requires careful assessment of the
observed number of cases after vaccination compared with the number
that would have been expected to occur based on the background rate
of natural intussusception.

Postmarketing surveillance data available to date do not suggest that
RotaTeq is associated with intussusception. The reported number of
VAERS intussusception cases among infants vaccinated with RotaTeq
does not exceed the number of expected background cases for either
the 1-7 day period or the 1-21 day period after vaccination. Within
each age group, which corresponds to the risk after each of the 3
doses of RotaTeq, the observed number of reports also is within the
expected range (Table 2). In addition, no cases of intussusception
were detected within 30 days of vaccination in more than 28 000 VSD
infants reported to have received RotaTeq vaccination. However,
because of possible underreporting to VAERS and the limited number of
infants in VSD vaccinated with RotaTeq to date, the possibility
cannot be excluded that an increased risk for intussusception (or any
other adverse event) might be observed over time.

Although the 17 intussusception cases occurring in infants within
1-21 days of RotaTeq vaccination do not exceed the expected number
for this risk period, a majority of these cases (11 [65 percent])
occurred within 1-7 days of vaccination. Of these 11 infants, 5 had
onset in October 2006. The apparent clustering of reported
intussusception cases in the week after vaccination might be
explained by characteristics of VAERS reporting, which is generally
more complete for severe adverse events that occur close to the time
of vaccination (4). The reason for the large number of reports in the
first 7 days after vaccination during the month of October [2006] is
unclear. This temporal pattern is not consistent with the pattern of
vaccine distribution data by month. As more data become available,
the significance of the apparent clustering of intussusception cases
in the week after RotaTeq vaccination will be examined further.

VAERS data merit cautious interpretation because of the inherent
limitations of passive surveillance. Underreporting is a limitation
of VAERS; however, the high level of awareness of the association of
the previous Rotashield vaccine with intussusception among U.S.
pediatricians and family practitioners (8) likely has improved
reporting of RotaTeq-related adverse events to VAERS. This conclusion
is supported by the response to a vaccine label change to RotaTeq
issued by Merck (and an accompanying public health notification
issued by FDA [available at
http://www.fda.gov/cber/safety/phnrota021307.htm] that received
extensive media coverage and was widely distributed among
pediatricians) on 13 Feb 2007, adding intussusception as a reported
adverse event after vaccination. Although the initial public health
alert for Rotashield published on 16 Jul 1999, resulted in
approximately 42 additional reports (that is, historical cases that
occurred prior to the label change) of intussusception to VAERS, the
recent RotaTeq label change had generated reports of only 5
additional cases as of 2 Mar 2007. Only one of these reports occurred
within 1-21 days of RotaTeq vaccination. Inclusion of this case in
the analysis will not affect the conclusions of this report.

The findings in this report are subject to at least 2 additional
limitations. First, the proportion of distributed doses of RotaTeq
that had been administered could not be determined. If the number of
doses administered was overestimated, the expected background number
of cases would decrease and the potential for an association between
vaccine and risk for intussusception would increase. Second, although
the most robust data available were used to estimate background rates
for intussusception hospitalizations, the accuracy and completeness
of these data have not been verified. A preliminary study suggests
that hospital discharge diagnoses might not include some
intussusception cases, such as those managed in non-inpatient
settings (such as, emergency departments, short-stay units, or
23-hour observation units) (9); thus, the background incidence of
intussusception might have been underestimated. In addition,
electronically coded data on intussusception might not represent true
cases (10). The likelihood of finding an association between vaccine
and intussusception might increase or decrease depending on the
effect of these factors.

The number of reports to VAERS of intussusception after
administration of RotaTeq has not exceeded the number expected to
occur based on background rates. RotaTeq vaccine is recommended for
all infants at ages 2, 4, and 6 months. Health-care providers are
reminded that the 1st dose should be administered to infants only
between ages 6 and 12 weeks, and the full series should be completed
before age 32 weeks (1). CDC and FDA will continue to monitor adverse
events reported after RotaTeq vaccination. All persons are encouraged
to report cases of intussusception or any adverse events after
RotaTeq or any other vaccination to VAERS. Reports may be submitted
securely online at or by fax at (+1)
877-721-0366. Reporting forms and additional information are
available by telephone at (+1) 800-822-7967.

* The odds of intussusception were 37 times higher among vaccine
recipients than among unvaccinated infants during the 3-7 days after
dose 1 of Rotashield.

References
---------
1. CDC. Prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and
children: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2006; 55 (No. RR-12) [available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5512a1.htm. - Mod.MPP]
2. Murphy TV, Gargiullo PM, Massoudi MS, et al. Intussusception among
infants given an oral rotavirus vaccine. N Engl J Med 2001; 344: 564-72.
3. Vesikari T, Matson DO, Dennehy P, et al. Safety and efficacy of a
pentavalent human-bovine (WC3) reassortant rotavirus vaccine. N Engl
J Med 2006; 354: 23-33.
4. Rosenthal S, Chen R. The reporting sensitivities of two passive
surveillance systems for vaccine adverse events. Am J Public Health
1995; 85:1 706-9.
5. Mullooly J, Drew L, DeStefano F, et al. Quality of HMO vaccination
databases used to monitor childhood vaccine safety. Vaccine Safety
DataLink Team. Am J Epidemiol 1999; 149:186-94.
6. Bines JE, Kohl KS, Forster J, et al. Acute intussusception in
infants and children as an adverse event following immunization: case
definition and guidelines of data collection, analysis, and
presentation. Vaccine 2004; 22: 569-74.
7. Tai JH, Curns AT, Parashar UD, Bresee JS, Glass RI. Rotavirus
vaccination and intussusception: can we decrease temporally
associated background cases of intussusception by restricting the
vaccination schedule? Pediatrics 2006; 118: e258-64.
8. Kempe A, Daley MF, Parashar UD, et al. Will pediatricians adopt
the new rotavirus vaccine? Pediatrics 2007; 119: 1-10.
9. Staat MA, Roberts N, Bernstein DI. Epidemiology and clinical
features of intussusception in children < 24 months of age in
Hamilton County, Ohio [abstract]. Pediatr Res 2000; 49: 242A.
10. Kramarz P, France EK, Destefano F, et al. Population-based study
of rotavirus vaccination and intussusception. Pediatr Infect Dis J
2001; 20: 410-6.

--
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This is a very well presented (and self explanatory) discussion on
the preliminary results following the implementation of active
surveillance. As mentioned in the report above, there are limitations
to the study and the data presented that could result in either an
overestimation of the cases or an underestimation of the observed
cases of intussusception following receipt of rotavirus vaccine. One
hopes if there is an error, that it is the former, as rotavirus is a
significant cause of morbidity and mortality for the childhood
population and the loss of another vaccine would be a significant
blow to the prevention of diarrheal diseases in the childhood
population worldwide. We await further data as there are more vaccine
recipients for observation. - Mod.MPP]
See Also
Rotavirus vaccine, intussusception: active surveillance 20070217.0609
2001
----
Rotavirus vaccine & intussusception - USA 20010224.0356
1999
----
Rotavirus vaccine recall - USA 19991017.1845
Rotavirus vaccine recall - USA (02) 19991019.1865
Rotavirus vaccine recall - USA (03) 19991021.1882
1997
----
Rotavirus vaccine research: current status (06) 19971214.2482
Rotavirus vaccine research: current status (05) 19971204.2427
Rotavirus vaccine research: current status (04) 19971202.2409
Rotavirus vaccine research: current status (03) 19971201.2402
Rotavirus vaccine research: current status (02) 19971126.2370
Rotavirus vaccine research: current status 19971124.2358
Rotavirus vaccine trial - Venezuela, Finland 19971102.2238
....................mpp/mj/jw
</body>
