<header id=043164>
Published Date: 2009-10-12 11:00:10 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Heartworm, canine - Canada
Archive Number: 20091012.3522
</header>
<body id=043164>
HEARTWORM, CANINE - CANADA
**************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Sat 10 Oct 2009
Source: NewMajority.com [edited]
<http://www.newmajority.com/rescued-katrina-dogs-trigger-heartworm-epidemic>


Rescued Katrina dogs trigger heartworm epidemic
-----------------------------------------------
According to the Hamilton Academy of Veterinarian Medicine (HAVM) in
Canada, a "huge increase" in heartworm disease in dogs -- 10 times the
normal in 2008 -- threatens to reach epidemic proportions and will take
years to curtail. The prime reason is abandoned dogs imported from
Louisiana into Canada by the Hamilton SPCA [Society For The Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals] after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 The dogs had been
inadequately tested, and carried the disease, which is spread by mosquitoes.

What started as a humanitarian gesture, importing Louisiana dogs, has
become a fixture with humane societies in Southern Ontario -- St
Catharines, Niagara Falls, Welland, Fort Erie, and even Cambridge and
Guelph. These dogs were sent to adoptive homes across America and parts of
Canada, and if the Hamilton experience is reflected in the US, a massive
increase in heartworm seems inevitable -- a terrible, costly, fatal disease
if untreated.

Last year [2008] some 600 dogs from Louisiana reached the Hamilton SPCA,
most under 8 months old that have nothing to do with hurricane season. The
puppies, billed as being "rescued", were sold for adoption by the Hamilton
SPCA for CAD 470 [USD 451] each. Most of the imported dogs are supplied by
the Louisiana dog rescue firm of BARK (Bordeaux Animal Rescue Krewe), which
now gets dogs from across the Southern states, which is prime heartworm
country.

A respected veterinarian, Dr Randy Stirling of Hamilton's Briarwood Animal
Hospital, says he was "absolutely shocked" that puppies are being imported
from the southern US: "I don't know how it can be justified." There's no
shortage of stray dogs and cats in Canada -- always a concern because so
many get "euthanized" rather than adopted. Dr Stirling recalled a meeting
of Hamilton vets accidentally discovering the alarming rise of heartworm in
dogs last year [2008]. "Some 32 veterinarians in the Hamilton area used to
see an average of about 5 cases of heartworm a year," he says. "Last year
it jumped to 37 cases."

Further examination found that 45 of 63 heartworm cases around Hamilton
were dogs that had been imported from Louisiana and the southern US. 18
owner declined to have their dogs treated -- "too expensive". These 18
dogs, if bitten by mosquitoes, are an immediate threat to other dogs, and
all will die horrible deaths if untreated.

Jim Sykes, who recently resigned as CEO of the Hamilton SPCA and this week
[week of 5 Oct 2009] was appointed to the newly created job of chief
operating officer of the Ontario SPCA, said Hamilton "piggy-backed" on the
US program to have Katrina dogs adopted. Hamilton chose to be a partner
with BARK rescue because it "invests heavily in testing, treatment, and
care of animals." Last May [2008] he was quoted in the Hamilton Spectator
saying "overpopulation" of dogs in urban areas is generally under control,
which justified importing Louisiana dogs. Sykes says adoptions doubled from
1600 to 3200.

Dr Stirling is unconvinced. That Hamilton SPCA imported 600 dogs from
Louisiana, "makes no sense, when we have no shortage of stray dogs here."
He says it is essential that the provincial government authorize (and pay
for) a new study in the increase of heartworm disease. The last full study
was done in 2002: "We thought the disease was almost stamped out in
Ontario, but now it will take years to correct."

Of some 400 000 dogs tested in 2002, 258 had heartworm. "It was usually 2
or 3 worms in the heart. Some of these Louisiana dogs may have 150 worms in
the heart, the lungs, the kidneys. A mosquito bites an infected Louisiana
dog, then bites a local dog, and the local dog then has heartworm. Signs
are lethargy, weariness, loss of appetite and eventual collapse. Treatment
can cost well over CAD 1000 [USD 960]."

Mr Sykes acknowledges that heartworm is a concern, and feels rainy weather
increases risk, and that "snowbirds" who vacation in Florida with their
dogs may return with the dogs infected.

As well as the Hamilton SPCA, Dr Stirling says there are 16 independent dog
rescue groups in the region that import Louisiana dogs. Even though the
HAVM has persuaded Hamilton to stop importing dogs, others continue to
import them. It is a lucrative business, and source of income. People think
they are doing humane work by giving a home to a Katrina or hurricane dog.
In another sense, the program seems a virtual puppy mill, sending dogs
across the US and into Canada.

While the Hamilton SPCA sold Louisiana dogs for CAD 470 [USD 451] each,
they usually charge CAD 330 [USD 316] for local adoptive dogs, and CAD 410
[USD 393] if it's a puppy. (Toronto Humane Society charges a tax-deductible
CAD 100 [USD 96] for a dog, "or what you can afford"; Toronto Animal
Services (TAS) charges CAD 166.25 [USD 159.40] for dogs, CAD 99.75 [USD
95.62] for cats).

Dr Stirling says Ontario government vets have tried for 3 years to alert
the government on the need for a heartworm investigation, but have gotten
no response. He also says he understands some Louisiana dogs have been sent
to Calgary and the [US] state of Washington -- "where I hear they have had
an outbreak of diseases common in the south but until now unknown in the
north."

Michael O'Sullivan, chairman and CEO of the Humane Society of Canada, has
visited BARK in Louisiana and says to him "it makes no sense to import
American dogs when we have no shortage of abandoned dogs here." He thinks
the BARK people are sincere and genuinely seek to help dogs. They are a
registered charity. O'Sullivan says he's visited the Hamilton SPCA "and
I've seen these dogs in cages piled on top of one another, waiting to be sold."

Ian McConachie, senior communicator at the Toronto Humane Society (which
has abundant dogs for adoption) is also concerned about the rise of
heartworm and says since Hurricane Katrina, heartworm nearly tripled in
Ontario, from 244 cases to 676. "Even that doesn't explain a 10-fold
increase in the Hamilton area between 2007-2008.

Dr J Owen Slocombe, recently retired professor of pathobiology at the
University of Guelph has done extensive studies of heartworm disease. He's
known in the profession as "Dr Heartworm", and is being approached to come
out of retirement to conduct another provincial study -- if the Ontario
government will provide funding.

At the moment, it looks as if an epidemic is looming, and vets like Randy
Stirling urge everyone with dogs to ensure they don't have heartworm.

Another danger of this parasitic disease transmitted by mosquitoes is that
wildlife is vulnerable, especially foxes, wolves, coyotes, raccoons: "Once
heartworm disease infects wildlife, a permanent source of infection becomes
established since there is no preventive medication or treatment for wild
animals."

[byline: Peter Worthington]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The title of this article is misleading. While rescued animals from
Katrina have heightened the awareness of veterinarians and the public in
this area with regard to heartworms, the dogs adopted from Louisiana as a
result of Hurricane Katrina have not been shown to have caused an epidemic.

In recent mosquito surveys, it was noted that mosquitoes carrying the
heartworm have been found farther north than was expected. These data have
been used to help educate clients and veterinarians about the need for
heartworm prevention and protocols for treatment for infected dogs.

It may not be that there is an epidemic of heartworms, but rather an
epidemic of diagnosis as the veterinarians are more sensitized to the
heartworm issue. It is likely that mosquitoes carrying the heartworm were
already in Canada before the displaced dogs arrived. The infected displaced
dogs may not have helped the issue, but they have not been shown to have
caused an epidemic of heartworm disease.

Most people have the belief that it is too cold in parts of Canada for
mosquitoes. This is not true. There are mosquitoes that are capable of
living in cold temperatures and many can overwinter in cold areas.

People migrating south in the winter with their pets and returning to the
north in the summer may have contributed to the problem, and the rescued
Katrina dogs may have contributed to the problem, but this story is
primarily about dogs that are being brought from Louisiana now, which are
the bulk of the infection arriving in part of Canada.

Heartworm (HW) infection is caused by a filarial organism, _Dirofilaria
immitis_. At least 70 species of mosquitoes can serve as intermediate
hosts; _Aedes_, _Anopheles_, and _Culex_ are the most common genera acting
as vectors. Patent infections are possible in numerous wild and companion
animal species. Wild animal reservoirs include wolves, coyotes, foxes,
California gray seals, sea lions, and raccoons. In companion animals, HW
infection is seen primarily in dogs and less commonly in cats and ferrets.
HW disease has been reported in most countries with temperate,
semitropical, or tropical climates, including the USA, Canada, and southern
Europe. In companion animals, infection risk is greatest in dogs and cats
housed outdoors. Although any dog, indoor or outdoor, is capable of being
infected, most infections are diagnosed in medium- to large-sized, 3 to 8
year old dogs.

Mosquito vector species acquire the 1st stage larvae (microfilariae) while
feeding on an infected host. Development of microfilariae to the 2nd larval
stage (L2) and to the infective 3rd stage (L3) occurs within the mosquito
in 1 to 4 weeks, depending on environmental temperatures. This development
phase requires the shortest time when the ambient temperature is higher
than 86 deg F (30 deg C). When mature, the infective larvae migrate to the
labium of the mosquito. As the mosquito feeds, the infective larvae erupt
through the tip of the labium with a small amount of hemolymph onto the
host's skin. The larvae migrate into the bite wound, beginning the
mammalian portion of their life cycle. A typical _Aedes_ mosquito is only
capable of surviving the developmental phase of small numbers of HW larvae,
usually less than 10 larvae per mosquito.

In canids and other susceptible hosts, infective larvae (L3) molt into a
4th stage (L4) in 2-3 days. After remaining in the subcutaneous tissue for
close to 2 months, they molt into young adults (L5) that migrate through
host tissue, arriving in the pulmonary arteries about 50 days later. Adult
worms (males about 15 cm [6 in] in length, females about 25 cm [10 in])
develop primarily in the pulmonary arteries of the caudal lung lobes over
the next 2-3 months. They reside primarily in the pulmonary arteries but
can move into the right ventricle when the worm burden is high.
Microfilariae are produced by gravid females 6-7 months after infection.

Microfilariae are usually detectable in infected canids not receiving
macrolide prophylaxis. However, 25 per cent to more than 50 per cent of
infected canids may not have circulating microfilariae. Thus, the number of
circulating microfilariae does not necessarily correlate strongly to adult
female HW burden. Adults typically live 3-5 years, while microfilariae may
survive for 1-2 years while awaiting a mosquito intermediate host.

Most dogs are highly susceptible to HW infection, and the majority of
infective larvae (L3) develop into adults. Ferrets are susceptible hosts,
and cats are somewhat resistant. A lower percentage of exposed cats develop
adult infections and the burden is often only 1-3 worms. Further evidence
of relative resistance in cats is the short survival time of many L5 in the
pulmonary arteries; adult worms probably survive no longer than 2 years.
Aberrant migration into different organs, including the CNS, has been
described in cats.

The severity of cardiopulmonary pathology in dogs is determined by worm
numbers, host immune response, duration of infection, and host activity
level. Live adult HW cause direct mechanical irritation of the intima and
pulmonary arterial walls, leading to perivascular cuffing with inflammatory
cells, including infiltration of high numbers of eosinophils. Live worms
seem to have an immunosuppressive effect; however the presence of dead
worms leads to immune reactions and subsequent lung pathology in areas of
the lung not directly associated with the dead HW. Long term infections,
due to all of the factors noted (that is, direct irritation, worm death,
and immune response) result in chronic lesions and subsequent scarring.
Active dogs tend to develop more pathology than inactive dogs for any given
worm burden. Frequent exertion increases pulmonary arterial pathology and
may precipitate overt clinical signs, including congestive heart failure
(CHF). High worm burdens are most often the result of infections acquired
from numerous mosquito exposures. High exposures in young, naive dogs in
temperate climates can result in severe infections, causing a vena cava
syndrome the following year. In general, due to the worm size and smaller
dimensions of the pulmonary vasculature, small dogs do not tolerate
infections and treatment as well as large dogs.

The only available heartworm adulticide is melarsomine dihydrochloride,
which is effective against mature (adult) and immature heartworms of both
genders. For class I and II patients, melarsomine is given at 2.5 mg/kg,
deep IM (intramuscular) in the epaxial (lumbar) musculature in the L3-L5
region using a 22 g needle (1 in [2.5cm] long for dogs less than 10 kg or
1.5 in [3.25cm] for dogs more than 10 kg). Pressure is applied during
delivery and for 1 min after the needle is withdrawn to prevent SC leakage.
The procedure is repeated on the opposite side 24 hr later. About a third
of dogs will exhibit local pain, swelling, soreness with movement, or
sterile abscessation at the injection site. Local fibrosis is uncommon.

Dogs with high worm burdens are at risk of severe pulmonary thromboembolism
from several days to 6 weeks postadulticide. Dogs with class III infection
receive the alternate (split-dose) regimen of 1 injection, followed in 1
month by 2 injections 24 hours apart. Administration of a single initial
dose results in a graded (about 50 per cent) worm kill and reduced
pulmonary complications. By initially killing few worms and completing the
treatment in 2 stages, the cumulative impact of worm emboli on severely
diseased pulmonary arteries and lungs can be reduced. This 3-injection
protocol is becoming the treatment of choice of many veterinarians
regardless of stage of disease, due to its increased safety and efficacy.

Other treatment protocols recommend the administration of prophylactic
doses of ivermectin for 1-6 months prior to administration of melarsomine,
if the clinical presentation does not demand immediate intervention. The
rationale for this approach is to greatly reduce or eliminate circulating
microfilariae and migrating _D. immitis_ larvae, stunt immature HW, and
reduce female worm mass by destroying the reproductive system. This results
in reduced antigenic mass, which in turns reduces the risk of pulmonary
thromboembolism. Following melarsomine injection, exercise must be severely
restricted for 4-6 weeks to minimize thromboembolic lung complications. A
low cardiac output should be maintained in order to reduce thrombosis and
endothelial damage and facilitate lung repair. Adverse effects of
melarsomine are otherwise limited to local inflammation, brief low-grade
fever, and salivation. Hepatic and renal toxicity are seldom seen.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
<http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/11300.htm&word=heartworm>.
- Mod.TG

The HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Canada is available at
<http://healthmap.org/r/00Vj>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
2004
---
Canine heartworm drug recall - USA 20040906.2487

.................sb/tg/mj/sh



*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
