<header id=036338>
Published Date: 2008-05-22 14:00:21 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Coxsackievirus B1, neonatal disease, 2007 - USA: (AK, CA, IL)
Archive Number: 20080522.1691
</header>
<body id=036338>
COXSACKIEVIRUS B1, NEONATAL DISEASE, 2007 - USA: (ALASKA, CALIFORNIA, ILLINOIS)
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Fri 23 May 2008
Source: MMWR Weekly, May 23, 2008 / 57(20);553-556 [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5720a4.htm?s_cid=mm5720a4_e>


Increased Detections and Severe Neonatal Disease Associated with
Coxsackievirus B1 Infection --- United States, 2007
-----------------------------------------------
Enteroviruses generally cause mild disease; however, neonates are at
higher risk for severe illness because of the immaturity of their
immune systems. Neonatal systemic enterovirus disease, characterized
by multiorgan involvement, is among the most serious, potentially
fatal conditions associated with enterovirus infection. Typical
clinical presentations include encephalomyocarditis (characteristic
of group B coxsackieviruses) and hemorrhage-hepatitis syndrome
(typical of echovirus 11) (1,2). To describe the severity of neonatal
illness associated with coxsackievirus B1 (CVB1) infection, CDC
analyzed case reports and preliminary data from the National
Enterovirus Surveillance System (NESS) for 2007. This report
describes the results of that analysis, which indicated that, in
2007, CVB1 for the 1st time was the predominant enterovirus in the
United States, accounting for 113 (25 percent) of 444 enterovirus
infections with known serotypes. In addition, phylogenetic analysis
of the 2007 CVB1 strains suggested that the cases resulted from
widespread circulation of a single genetic lineage. Health-care
providers and public health departments should be vigilant to the
possibility of neonatal disease caused by CVB1. Testing for
enteroviruses in clinically compatible cases and reporting of
identified enteroviruses to NESS should be encouraged.

NESS is a voluntary, passive surveillance system for monitoring
enterovirus infections in the United States. Participating
laboratories, which include public health and private laboratories
and the CDC Picornavirus Laboratory, report enterovirus detections to
NESS on a monthly basis. Each report includes age, sex, state,
specimen type and collection date, and enterovirus serotype.

Beginning in August 2007, CDC received multiple reports of cases of
severe neonatal illness and death associated with enterovirus
infection. CVB1 was identified as the causative agent in many of
these cases. Previously, no fatal infection of CVB1 had been reported
to NESS (3). On the basis of these reports, CDC began a review of
clinical, virologic, and surveillance data related to enterovirus for
2007, in collaboration with local and state public health departments
and hospitals. A case of CVB1 infection was defined as detection of
enterovirus by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) or viral culture, with the virus typed as CVB1 by molecular
(i.e., RT-PCR sequencing) or antigenic (i.e., neutralization or
immunofluorescence) methods.

As of 1 Feb 2008, NESS had received 514 reports of enterovirus
infections in 36 states for 2007. CVB1 was the most commonly detected
enterovirus reported to NESS, accounting for 113 (25 percent) of 444
reports with known serotypes [data presented as a figure in the
original text]. Other most frequently reported serotypes included
echovirus 18 (63 [14 percent]), echovirus 9 (49 [11 percent]), and
echovirus 6 (37 [8 percent]). Children aged <1 year accounted for 65
(68 percent) of 95 CVB1 reports with known age, including 50 (53
percent) infants aged <1 month. CVB1 was detected in 19 states; 58
percent of all CVB1 detections were reported from California (n = 38)
and Illinois (n = 28).

Phylogenetic analysis of current CVB1 strains based on partial
sequence of the VP1 gene revealed that all were closely related to
each other and to a 2006 strain from Colorado. Analysis also revealed
that the strains were more distantly related to earlier strains.

A total of 5 CVB1-associated neonatal deaths were identified: 2 from
California, one from Illinois, and one death each from Colorado and
New Mexico. These came to CDC attention in connection with requests
for laboratory assistance [data presented in the form of a table in
the original text]. In all 5 cases, the neonates had multisystem
disease with onset within the 1st 4 days of life. In 4 of the 5 fatal
cases, the mothers had febrile illness or chorioamnionitis around the
time of delivery, suggesting vertical mother-to-infant transmission.

The 3 distinct clusters of severe enterovirus illness, including
illnesses caused by CVB1, detected in Los Angeles, California,
Chicago, Illinois, and Kotzebue, Alaska, during 2007 are described below.

Los Angeles County, California

In September 2007, in response to reports of 3 cases (2 of them
fatal) of neonatal enterovirus myocarditis, including 2 in
CVB1-positive neonates, the Los Angeles County Department of Public
Health asked all hospitals in the county to report all
enterovirus-positive cases of severe or fatal myocarditis, aseptic
meningitis, or sepsis-like febrile illness that occurred among
children during June-November 2007.

A total of 30 enterovirus-positive patients from 7 hospitals were
identified (all with illness diagnosed by RT-PCR). Median age was 15
days (range: <1 day-14 years); 22 (73 percent) were aged <1 month. 4
(13 percent) patients aged <1-7 days died, and another 14 (47
percent) required intensive-care unit (ICU) treatment. Clinical
presentations included meningitis (22 patients), myocarditis (12),
sepsis-like illness (5), hepatitis (2), coagulopathy (6), and
respiratory difficulties (3). 11 patients, including all 9 patients
aged <7 days at admission, had illness with multiorgan involvement.

Enterovirus serotype was determined in 19 cases for which isolates
obtained by viral culture were available. CVB1 accounted for 14
cases; CVB2 accounted for 2 cases, and CVB3, CVB4, and echoviruses 7
and 11 accounted for one case each. One patient was coinfected with
CVB1 and CVB3. Two of the 4 patients who died were infected with
CVB1. Specimens from the other 2 patients who died were not available
for virus characterization.

Chicago, Illinois

In September 2007, the CDC Picornavirus Laboratory identified CVB1 as
the source of infection in 2 cases of severe neonatal disease at
Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago. Subsequently, a review of
the hospital's laboratory and medical records was conducted to
identify additional enterovirus-positive cases and obtain diagnoses
and clinical syndrome information. 50 enterovirus-positive children
(all diagnosed by RT-PCR) were admitted during 6 Jun - 2 Nov 2007, a
2-fold increase compared with the entire years 2005 (25 patients) and
2006 (26 patients). Median age of patients was 33 days (range: <1
day-8 years); 40 (80 percent) patients were aged <1 month.

Serotype was determined for 9 patients admitted to ICU; CVB1 was
found in 8 patients, and echovirus 18 in one patient. In 2 other
patients, an enterovirus was identified by immunofluorescence
staining as a group B coxsackievirus. Specimens from the remaining 39
RT-PCR-positive patients were not available for further virus characterization.

12 (24 percent) infants aged <1-12 days required ICU admission. Their
clinical presentations included myocarditis (11 patients),
respiratory distress (9), hepatitis (8), coagulopathy (6 patients),
aseptic meningitis (4), and meningoencephalitis (3). 11 (92 percent)
patients had multiorgan involvement, including 5 with myocarditis,
meningitis, or meningoencephalitis, and hepatitis (3 also had
coagulopathy). One CVB1-positive patient died, and one required heart
transplantation.

Kotzebue, Alaska

In early September 2007, Maniilaq Health Center notified the Alaska
Department of Health and Social Services of an increase in severe
febrile illness among hospitalized young infants (including 3 with
myocarditis). Medical record review indicated that during 15 Aug - 11
Sep 2007, 7 infants aged <1 month (23 percent of 31 babies born in
the Northwest Arctic Borough region since 1 Jul 2007) had been
admitted to the health center with fever and respiratory distress,
myocarditis, or meningitis (median age: 18 days; range: 5-48 days).
Six patients, 5 with multiorgan involvement, required ICU treatment,
referral to a higher-level hospital, or both. Of these, 3 patients
had myocarditis with aseptic meningitis and respiratory failure
(including one with elevated liver enzymes and coagulopathy); 2 had
aseptic meningitis and respiratory distress, and one had aseptic
meningitis. The patient with milder illness had a febrile syndrome.
None of the patients died.

One patient with myocarditis tested enterovirus-positive by RT-PCR,
but the specimen was not available for further virus
characterization. CVB1 was isolated from a stool specimen of the
patient with aseptic meningitis. The etiologic agent remained unknown
in 5 cases. In addition, CVB1 was isolated from a respiratory
specimen of an infant aged 12 months with pneumonia who was treated
at the health center as an outpatient during the same period.

[Reported by: L Mascola, MD, D Terashita, MD, Acute Communicable
Disease Control, Los Angeles County Dept of Public Health; MB
Salzman, MD, Kaiser Permanente West Los Angeles Medical Center; D
Schnurr, PhD, S Yagi, T Padilla, Viral and Rickettsial Disease
Laboratory, California Dept of Public Health. N Verma, MD, X Zheng,
MD, PhD, ST Shulman, MD, Children's Memorial Hospital, Northwestern
Univ Feinberg School of Medicine; MU Harris, MSN, Children's Memorial
Hospital, Chicago, Illinois. R Gibson, MD, Maniilaq Health Center,
Kotzebue; E Funk, MD, Alaska Dept of Health and Social Svcs; T
Schmidt, MS, M Westcott, Alaska State Virology Laboratory. C
Robinson, PhD, Children's Hospital, Aurora, Colorado. JP Burns, MD,
JD, Dept of Pathology, Univ of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque; Scientific Laboratory Div, New Mexico Dept of Health. N
Khetsuriani, MD, PhD, S Oberste, PhD, M Pallansch, PhD, A Fowlkes,
MPH, M Wikswo, MPH, Div of Viral Diseases, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases; Div of Viral and Rickettsial
Diseases, National Center for Zoonotic, Vector-Borne and Enteric
Diseases; K Sircar, EIS Officer, CDC.)

MMWR Editorial Note
---------------------------
In 2007, an increased level of CVB1 activity was associated with
severe neonatal disease and multiple deaths in the United States. The
actual extent of CVB1-associated morbidity and mortality likely was
much greater because 1) nonpolio enterovirus infections are not
nationally reportable, 2) diagnostic testing for enteroviruses often
is not pursued in clinical settings, and 3) serotype identification
from enterovirus-positive specimens is not performed routinely. CVB1
has an epidemic pattern of circulation, with increases usually
lasting 2-3 years [data presented as a figure in the original text].
During 1970-2005, CVB1 accounted for a small (2.3 percent) but
increasing proportion of all enteroviruses reported in the United
States (3). In 2007, CVB1 was the most commonly reported serotype,
accounting for 25 percent of all reported enterovirus infections with
known serotypes. Until 2007, CVB1 had never been the most commonly
reported serotype and, even in peak years, accounted for <10 percent
of all enterovirus reports. The year 2007 also was unusual for the
number of CVB1- associated fatalities reported to NESS: 5 fatal cases
were reported for the year. CVB1-associated deaths are reported
rarely (4-6), and had not been reported previously to NESS (3,7).

Historically, 2/3rds of CVB1 detections have been among children aged
<1 year (3). During 1983-2003, neonates accounted for 22 percent of
CVB1 reports versus 11 percent for other enteroviruses (7),
suggesting a propensity to infect newborns. Cases of neonatal
CVB1-associated disease identified in 2007 were characterized not
only by myocarditis and central nervous system involvement typical of
group B coxsackieviruses but also, on multiple occasions, by
hepatitis and coagulopathy, which usually are reported with echovirus
11 infections.

Enterovirus infections are common, particularly during summer-fall
months and typically are spread person-to-person via the fecal-oral
or oral-oral routes and through respiratory droplets and fomites.
Perinatal transmission from mother to infant occurs transplacentally
or from exposure to maternal blood or secretions during delivery.
Maternal enterovirus illness around the time of delivery and lack of
maternal antibodies to an infecting serotype increase the risk for
transmission. Onset of enterovirus disease resulting from perinatal
transmission occurs in the 1st 1-2 weeks of life and carries a higher
risk for severe illness and death than enterovirus infection acquired
during the postnatal period (1,2,8).

No treatments approved by the Food and Drug Administration for
enterovirus are available. Intravenous immunoglobulin sometimes is
used, but its effectiveness in neonatal enterovirus disease is
uncertain (2). Use of the candidate antiviral drug pleconaril
(Schering-Plough, Kenilworth, New Jersey) showed benefit in neonates
with life-threatening enterovirus disease (9); a phase 2 clinical
trial of pleconaril in neonates is underway (10).

In the absence of vaccines, nonpolio enterovirus transmission can be
reduced by adherence to good hygienic practices, such as thorough
hand-washing (especially after diaper changes), disinfection of
contaminated surfaces by chlorine-containing household cleaners, and
avoidance of shared utensils and drinking containers. To prevent
nosocomial transmission of enteroviruses, neonatal hospital units
should strictly enforce routine infection-control measures.

Serotype identification is important for recognizing differences in
clinical profiles and outcomes between enteroviruses during seasonal
outbreaks (2). Enterovirus RT-PCR testing allows rapid and sensitive
detection of enteroviruses in clinical samples but does not
differentiate serotypes. Molecular typing of enteroviruses based on
VP1 gene sequence, which permits rapid identification of any
enterovirus and provides data for phylogenetic analysis, is
increasingly available at public health laboratories (2). Because
serotype-specific surveillance for enteroviruses is helpful for
monitoring trends in enterovirus circulation and identification of
the emergence of new predominant serotypes or strains, public health
agencies and private laboratories should report enterovirus detections to NESS.

References
----------
(1) Modlin JF. Perinatal echovirus infection: insights from a
literature review of 61 cases of serious infection and 16 outbreaks
in nurseries. Rev Infect Dis 1986;8:918--26.

(2) Abzug MJ. Presentation, diagnosis, and management of enterovirus
infections in neonates. Paediatr Drugs 2004;6:1--10.

(3) CDC. Enterovirus surveillance---United States, 1970--2005. MMWR
2006;55(No. SS-8).

(4) Chiou CC, Liu WT, Chen SJ, et al. Coxsackievirus B1 infection in
infants less than 2 months of age. Am J Perinatol 1998;15:155--9.

(5) Wright HT, Okuyama K, McAllister RM. An infant fatality
associated with coxsackie B1 virus. J Pediatr 1963;63:428--31.

(6) Lau G. Acute fulminant, fatal coxsackie B virus infections: a
report of 2 cases. Ann Acad Med Singapore 1994;23:917--20.

(7) Khetsuriani N, LaMonte A, Oberste MS, Pallansch M. Neonatal
enterovirus infections reported to the national enterovirus
surveillance system in the United States, 1983--2003. Pediatr Infect
Dis J 2006;25:889--93.

(8) Lin TY, Kao HT, Hsieh SH, et al. Neonatal enterovirus infections:
emphasis on risk factors of severe and fatal infections. Pediatr
Infect Dis J 2003;22:889--94.

(9) Rotbart HA, Webster AD, Pleconaril Treatment Registry Group.
Treatment of potentially life-threatening enterovirus infections with
pleconaril. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:228--35.

(10) Collaborative Antiviral Study Group. Clinical trials. Pleconaril
enteroviral sepsis syndrome. Protocol CASG 106 (DMID#99-018). Available at
<http://www.casg.uab.edu/new%20clinical%20trials%20page.htm>.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Enteroviruses generally cause mild disease; however, neonates are at
higher risk for severe illness because of the immaturity of their
immune systems. During 2007 a novel strain of Human coxsackievirus B1
phylogenetically distinct from previously circulating strains,
appeared as a serious neonatal pathogen. Human coxsackievirus B1 for
the 1st time was the predominant enterovirus in the United States,
accounting for 113 (25 percent) of 444 enterovirus infections with
known serotypes. Phylogenetic analysis of the 2007 human
coxsackievirus B1 strains suggested that the cases resulted from
widespread circulation of a single genetic lineage.

The 3 distinct clusters of severe enterovirus illness, including
illnesses caused by human coxsackievirus B1, detected in Los Angeles,
California, Chicago, Illinois, and Kotzebue, Alaska, during 2007 are
described in the above report.

The year 2007 also was unusual for the number of human coxsackievirus
B1-associated fatalities: 5 fatal cases were reported for the year.
Human coxsackievirus B-associated deaths are reported rarely, and had
not been reported previously to the US National Enterovirus
Surveillance System.

Human coxsackievirus B1-associated neonatal disease appears now to
rank as a novel emerging disease in the USA. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2007
----
Conjunctivitis, coxsackievirus A24 - Taiwan (02) 20071025.3470
Conjunctivitis, coxsackievirus A24 - Taiwan 20071017.3393
2005
----
Encephalitis, coxsackievirus - India (UP) (02) 20051127.3434
Encephalitis, coxsackievirus - India (Uttar Pradesh) 20051025.3115
Undiagnosed disease, fatal - Greece: coxsackievirus susp. 20050521.1403
2000
----
Coxsackievirus & heart disease 20000331.0482
.............................................cp/msp/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
