<header id=020519>
Published Date: 2011-07-15 09:31:10 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Novel pneumonia-associated adenovirus, titi monkey, human
Archive Number: 20110715.2141
</header>
<body id=020519>
NOVEL PNEUMONIA-ASSOCIATED ADENOVIRUS, TITI MONKEY, HUMAN
*********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 14 Jul 2011
Source: Nature News [edited]
http://www.nature.com/news/2011/110714/full/news.2011.416.html


Respiratory virus jumps from monkeys to humans
----------------------------------------------
A novel adenovirus, named TMAdV (Titi monkey adenovirus), infected
both a titi monkey colony and a human scientist and her family. The
virus is described today in PLoS Pathogens [see Chen EC et al. PLoS
Pathog. 7(7), e1002155 (2011)]. The team that discovered it might also
have found the 1st human to be infected: the primary carer for a
colony of titi monkeys (_Callicebus cupreus_) that suffered an
outbreak.

The culprit is an adenovirus, one of a class of viruses that cause a
range of illnesses in humans, including pneumonia. But this particular
strain has never been seen before. It has been dubbed TMAdV, or
titi-monkey adenovirus. "It's always been thought that adenoviruses
are not likely to be causes of outbreaks or pandemics because they
have never been known to cross between animals and humans," says
Charles Chiu, director of the UCSF [University of California, San
Francisco]-Abbott Viral Diagnostics and Discovery Center at the
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), who led the study. Now
that assumption needs to be re-examined.

In May 2009, a deadly outbreak of respiratory illness spread through
a colony of titi monkeys at the California National Primate Research
Center in Davis. Of the 65 monkeys housed in one building, 23
developed symptoms, including pneumonia. As a result, 19 died or were
put down.

Chiu and his colleagues analysed tissue taken from the affected
monkeys, and identified a previously unknown virus. Genetic sequencing
revealed it to be an adenovirus, although its genome was substantially
different to those of all known related viruses. But what tipped the
researchers off that there was something unusual about this virus,
says Chiu, was what happened when they tried to culture it. "It was
unusual to see it grow well in human cell lines, but not monkey"
cells, he says. This suggested that the virus could infect humans as
well as titi monkeys. "After we interviewed all of the staff, the only
person who said they had been sick was one researcher -- the one who
had had the closest daily contact with the colony," says Chiu.

That researcher experienced flu-like upper-respiratory-tract symptoms
for 4 weeks. More crucially, a family member who had never visited the
primate centre also became ill -- demonstrating that TMAdV can spread
between humans.

The titi monkeys might not have been the original hosts of the virus.
Of those that developed symptoms, 83 percent died -- a fatality rate
that would prevent the virus from circling in the population without
wiping out the monkeys. In human-specific strains of adenovirus, death
rates usually only reach 18 percent.

The original host species could be humans, who passed the virus to
the monkeys, only for it to jump back to humans -- or it could be
another animal, such as a rodent. The researchers are collecting blood
samples from monkeys and humans from all over the United States,
Brazil, and Africa to help them to discover the virus' origins.

Chiu says that there is no reason to suspect that there will be a
pandemic of TMAdV, as there has been with other viruses that spread to
humans from animals. A survey of blood samples from 81 random, healthy
blood donors from the western United States found that 2 people
already had significant levels of antibody to TMAdV. "This virus then
potentially crossed into the human population a long time ago and is
now circulating at low levels," says Chiu.

But the more we know about this and other new viruses, the better,
says Eric Delwart, a virologist at the Blood Systems Research
Institute at UCSF. "Characterizing animal viromes facilitates the
detection of related viruses, and may shave a few precious days from
identifying a new virus in the event of a future severe outbreak," he
says.

The discovery also raises the possibility of using adenoviruses as
vectors in gene therapy, in which a virus is used to correct defects
in a patient's genes, says Chiu. "The fact that TMAdV appears to
infect 2 or more different species but is not common in the human
population also suggests this might be a therapy that could have
broader applicability," says Chiu, because it means the virus on a
wider range of targets. Other labs are already investigating gene
therapies using adenoviruses. "This could open up new and better
treatment possibilities," says Chiu.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[To put these data in perspective the following background
information has been extracted from the authors' introduction to their
paper published in PLoS Pathogens (Chen EC, Yagi S, Kelly KR, et al:
Cross-Species Transmission of a Novel Adenovirus Associated with a
Fulminant Pneumonia Outbreak in a New World Monkey Colony. PLoS
Pathog. 2011; 7(7): e1002155. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002155;
http://www.plospathogens.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.ppat.1002155).

"Adenoviruses, first isolated in the 1950s from explanted adenoid
tissue, are double-stranded nonenveloped DNA viruses that naturally
infect many vertebrates, including humans and nonhuman primates. The
human adenoviruses in the _Mastadenovirus_ genus, comprised of all
mammalian adenoviruses, are classified into 7 species A-G, and at
least 51 different serotypes (and 5 proposed types, HAdV-52 to
HAdV-56) have been described to date. Adenoviruses are the cause of an
estimated 5-10 percent of febrile illnesses in children worldwide.
Some serotypes, such as human adenovirus type 14 (HAdV-14), have been
associated with severe and potentially fatal outbreaks of pneumonia in
residential facilities and military bases. Adenoviruses have also been
associated with other clinical syndromes including conjunctivitis,
hepatitis, and diarrhea. In nonhuman primates, most epidemiologic
studies of adenoviruses have focused on their identification in fecal
samples from asymptomatic animals. Overt respiratory disease
associated with simian adenoviruses has also been observed. Although
adenoviruses are significant pathogens, genetically modified strains
are being actively explored as potential vectors for vaccines and gene
therapy.

Infection by adenoviruses has generally been thought to be
species-specific. Human adenoviruses do not usually replicate in
monkey cells in the absence of helper viruses, and do not productively
infect rodents (and vice versa). Studies of sera from animal handlers
and zoo workers exposed to chimpanzees in captivity fail to detect
antibodies to chimpanzee adenoviruses. However, recent serological
surveys have found antibodies to New World and Old World monkey
adenoviruses in donor human sera from regions where the monkeys are
endemic. In addition, phylogenetic analyses of adenoviruses from
greater apes reveal that they fall precisely into "human" adenoviral
species B, C, and E. The high degree of sequence relatedness within
members of each species suggests that at least some adenoviral strains
may be capable of infecting both nonhuman primates and humans.

Beginning in May of 2009, a deadly outbreak of fulminant pneumonia
and hepatitis occurred in a closed colony of New World titi monkeys of
the _Callicebus_ genus at the California National Primate Research
Center (CNPRC). Routine microbiological testing for an infectious
etiology was negative. We previously developed the Virochip
(University of California, San Francisco) as a broad-spectrum
surveillance assay for identifying viral causes of unknown acute and
chronic illnesses. The Virochip, a pan-viral microarray containing
approximately 19 000 probes derived from all viral species in GenBank
(n approx 2500), has been previously successful in detection of novel
outbreak viruses such as the SARS coronavirus and the 2009 pandemic
H1N1 influenza virus. Here we apply the Virochip to identify a novel
and highly divergent adenovirus as the cause of the titi monkey
outbreak. In addition, we present clinical and serological evidence
that this virus may have infected a researcher at the CNPRC and a
family member, thus demonstrating for the first time the potential for
cross-species infection by adenoviruses."

General information on the role of adenoviruses in human disease can
be found at
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/revb/respiratory/eadfeat.htm and
photographs and information on titi monkeys can be accessed at
http://www.northrup.org/photos/dusky-titi/. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2010
----
Novel pneumonia-associated adenovirus, Titi monkey, human 20101024.3855
Novel pneumonia-associated adenovirus, Titi monkey, human 20101023.3850
.................................................cp/mj/mpp
</body>
