<header id=061536>
Published Date: 2011-11-03 06:43:46 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed disease, lobster - USA: (northeast) declining population
Archive Number: 20111103.3271
</header>
<body id=061536>
UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE, LOBSTER - USA: (NORTHEAST) DECLINING POPULATION
********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 1 Nov 2011
Source: Food Manufacturing, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]
http://www.foodmanufacturing.com/scripts/ShowPR~RID~23337.asp


Nick Crismale made his career as a lobsterman, but lately there are
not enough of the crustaceans in Long Island Sound to make it worth
putting out the traps.

Crismale, who dedicated himself to clamming this year [2011], had been
among the few remaining holdouts in an industry devastated by a steady
decline in lobster stocks. Only about 30 full-time lobstermen are left
in Connecticut, down from more than 300 in the years before a
devastating lobster die-off in 1999.

"We're losing a way of life. We're losing a heritage," said Crismale,
61, the leader of the Connecticut Commercial Lobstermen's Association.
Some argued last year [2010] that the species was rebounding, and
fishermen fought back a proposal for a 5-year ban on lobster fishing
south of Cape Cod, Massachusetts. But that optimism is fading.
Researchers who trawl the waters of Long Island Sound for a survey
that began in 1984 say they have never seen so few lobsters.

The 1999 crash was heralded by the typically feisty lobsters turning
limp and losing their fight. The pattern has repeated itself each late
summer, and state officials say they receive a larger number of
anecdotal reports of sick and dying lobsters every year.

While lobsters are thriving in Maine, production is down from a peak
in the late 1990s in the area south of Cape Cod through North
Carolina. Scientists cannot explain the decline, but possible factors
include overfishing, a 1996 Rhode Island oil spill and a disease that
disfigures lobster shells but does not taint the meat. They also
believe it may be partly explained by warmer water temperatures that
have driven lobsters to cooler, deeper waters -- away from prime
spawning grounds and to places where more predators lurk. In Long
Island Sound, scientists say, commercial lobster fishing may be
doomed.

The number of lobsters found by trawlers that take samples at 200
random points in the sound every year has been falling "precipitously"
since the late 1990s, said Penny Howell, a marine fisheries biologist
with the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection
in Old Lyme. She said a field crew could not even deliver on a
researcher's recent request for 10 lobsters.

"Whether lobster fishing is going to be commercially viable is highly
questionable," said Howell, who added that she believes the lobster is
resilient enough to avoid disappearing from the sound altogether.
Rising water temperatures and runoff contamination are among the
suspected culprits in Long Island Sound, an estuary that is bounded by
New York City at its western point and has roughly 8 million people
living within its watershed area. Howell said water temperatures in
the western half of the sound now go above a 68 deg F [20 deg C]
threshold for lobsters for weeks at a time in the summer, leaving them
vulnerable to any additional stresses. She said the same phenomenon is
playing out in Rhode Island and southern Massachusetts. Earlier this
month [October 2011], Connecticut state representative Terry Backer, a
former lobsterman, arranged a meeting of fishermen who asked state
lawmakers to urge neighboring New York state to stop using methoprene,
a pesticide used to kill mosquitoes that may carry the West Nile
virus.

"If you put something that's designed to kill things into the
environment, you don't have control over what it kills," said Backer,
a Stratford democrat who is also executive director of the nonprofit
Soundkeeper Fund. A spokeswoman for the New York Department of
Environmental Conservation, Aphrodite Montalvo, said research shows
the lobsters had been stressed by hostile environmental conditions and
that individual pesticides were not enough to cause the die-off. She
said the agency has upgraded sewage treatment plants and taken other
steps toward improving water quality. Crismale, of Guilford, said he
holds out some hope that the industry will bounce back. He turned to
clams in part to keep up his equipment running in the meantime.

But he complained that fishery managers are focusing on regulating the
fishermen and not on other, more difficult issues such as water
pollution and the recovery of fish that prey on young lobster.

"I just refuse to give up. I'm hoping somewhere along the line
somebody comes up with a program that focuses on the real issues," he
said. A Waterford lobsterman who fishes out of New London, said the
fishermen have also been squeezed in recent years by hikes in minimum
size requirements. With stocks dwindling and the price of lobster down
to USD 4 a pound, he said lobstermen are putting in long hours and
maintaining expensive equipment for what amounts to "beer and
cigarette money." "There are few guys willing to put in the work it
takes to be a commercial lobsterman," he said.

The lobster haul in Connecticut has shriveled to about 400 000 pounds
[180 tons] annually from 3.7 million pounds [about 1700 tons] in 1998.
The board that advises the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission
on lobster rules voted last year [2010] to scrap a proposed 5-year
lobster fishing ban for much of the East Coast, but fishermen say they
are concerned now about proposals to limit the catch.

For lobstermen seeking other work, a program funded by the US
Department of Agriculture provides training for other jobs in the
maritime industry. Tessa Getchis helps to coordinate the program as
associate extension educator at Connecticut Sea Grant, which is funded
mainly through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
She said about 80 lobstermen have signed up for the program, which
offers classes in refitting lobster boats and applying their skills to
other trades such as aquaculture.

"Some of them have made the decision to move on," Getchis said. "They
all hope that this industry will turn around, but it just doesn't look
that way right now."

[Byline: Michael Melia]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[While this is a case of multiple factors as causes for the lack of
lobsters, it is unclear what is happening to the lobsters. The limp
shell situation is mentioned. There is no clear indication if they are
dying or failing to reproduce or if they have moved to other
locations.

While water temperatures of 68 F (20 deg C) do not sound too bad to
humans, lobsters prefer cold (35 deg F or 1.7 deg C), clean, salt
water and a dark, solitary resting space. So 68 F is really hot for a
lobster.

It seems this article agrees there are a host of possible reasons for
the lobster decline, but no real path forward. There are also more
questions, such as did they leave for cooler waters or have they
failed to reproduce. Just as the problem seems to have been created by
several factors, so the solution is likely to be multipronged as well.
That may include more research into theses creatures in and around
Connecticut and Long Island, NY, to determine a bit more precisely
what is happening.

On a local level, people who enjoying eating the lobster may be faced
with higher prices. Perhaps, a portion of all lobsters sold, or
consumed should go into some research account for understanding what
is happening to the lobster. - Mod.TG]

[Long Island Sound and the states mentioned in the article can be seen
on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at
http://healthmap.org/r/1oOF. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
2010
----
Undiagnosed disease, lobster - USA (02): (NY) 20100828.3070
Undiagnosed disease, lobster - USA: (NY) 20100826.3027
2005
----
Undiagnosed disease, lobster - USA (New England) 20050217.0533
2003
----
Lobster decline - USA (NY) (02) 20030118.0150
Lobster decline - USA (NY) 20030116.0126
2000
----
Lobster die-off - USA (Long Island Sound): update 20000330.0470
.................................................sb/tg/mj/ml
</body>
