<header id=048279>
Published Date: 2011-09-26 10:45:06 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Asia: update
Archive Number: 20110926.2919
</header>
<body id=048279>
PORCINE REPRODUCTIVE AND RESPIRATORY SYNDROME - ASIA: UPDATE
************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 26 Sep 2011 [accessed]
Source: Emerging Infectious Diseases [letter to the editor, edited]
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/17/9/11-0411_article.htm


Ref: An T-Q, Tian Z-J, Leng C-L, Peng J-M, Tong G-Z: Highly pathogenic
porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, Asia [letter].
Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Sep; 17(9): 1782-4.
DOI: 10.3201/eid1709.110411
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Recently, the novel and highly virulent variant of porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV), which first
emerged in the People's Republic of China and Viet Nam in 2006, has
rapidly spread in pigs in Southeast Asia. The affected countries
include Bhutan, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Thailand, and Singapore. In eastern and northern Asia, South Korea and
Russia were also reported to be affected [map available at the source
URL above]. The epidemic affected not only large commercial farms but
also the backyard industry, which created a serious problem for the
global swine industry and for food safety. In February 2011, the
Veterinary and Animal Breeding Agency in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia,
confirmed an outbreak of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome
(PRRS). Nearby neighbors, such as Japan, North Korea, Indonesia, and
other Asia-Pacific countries, are also at risk.

PRRS was first reported in the United States in 1987. The disease
causes reproductive failure during late-term gestation in sows and
respiratory disease in pigs of all ages. In 2006, a new, highly
pathogenic PRRS emerged, characterized by high fever (41-42 deg C
[105.8-107.6 deg F]), skin discoloration/reddening, high incidence of
illness (50-100 percent), and high proportion of deaths (20-100
percent) in pigs of all ages. This new PRRS has spread throughout the
swine industry in China, resulting in the culling of an estimated 20
million pigs annually in 2006-2007 in China (4). PRRSV is a member of
the family _Arteriviridae_ in the order Nidovirales, which also
includes severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus.

PRRSV is a single-stranded positive sense RNA virus that shows high
rates of genetic diversity. In the genome of the novel highly
pathogenic PRRSV mutant, 4 deletions (2 deletions in nonstructural
protein 2, one deletion in the 5' untranslated region, and one
deletion in the 3' untranslated region), and some other point
mutations, have occurred, which were markedly different from those
found in any other previous virus isolate.

After a surveillance study of the epidemic and an analysis of more
than 300 novel highly pathogenic PRRSVs were conducted, the highly
pathogenic PRRSV from China was considered to have gradually evolved
from CH-1a, a local PRRSV isolate. The evolutionary path could be
traced through intermediate PRRSV strains. Moreover, we found that
highly pathogenic PRRSV has a further enlarged deletion in
nonstructural protein 2.

Highly pathogenic PRRSV first emerged in China and Viet Nam almost
simultaneously in 2006, and the epidemic focus was in the area between
southern China and northern Viet Nam.

Although no evidence has shown that the highly pathogenic PRRSV
isolate from China or Viet Nam has spread in other areas, highly
pathogenic PRRS has spread throughout the Malaysian Peninsula to
southern Russia.

In addition, all highly pathogenic PRRSV isolates share high sequence
identity and have the same deletions as the highly pathogenic PRRSV
isolated from China or Viet Nam. PRRSV can spread through a variety of
routes, including direct contact between pigs, droplet contact through
nasal secretions, direct contact with saliva and feces, and indirect
contact.

PRRS has spread rapidly around the world through pig sales, semen, and
airborne transmission, including from airline passengers who carry the
virus on their clothing, shoes, or equipment while traveling. In the
global market, any virus emerging in the highly pathogenic form is a
threat. The risk of highly pathogenic PRRS spreading to other
countries is increasing.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[PRRS is one of OIE's notifiable diseases; it is not zoonotic. An
updated (May 2010) chapter 2.8.7 on the disease is available in OIE's
Terrestrial Manual, at
http://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Health_standards/tahm/2.08.07_PRRS.pdf.
- Mod.AS]
See Also
Porcine reproductive & respiratory syndrome - Mongolia: (TO), OIE 20110521.1542
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Myanmar: (Naypyidaw, MD) 20110427.1307
2010
----
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Viet Nam (07): update 20101205.4357
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Thailand: OIE 20101201.4320
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Belarus: new strain 20101016.3744
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Laos: (VT) OIE 20100708.2278
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - Viet Nam (05): human NOT 20100529.1788
2009
----
Porcine reprod. & resp. syndrome - China (04): update, RFI
.................................................arn/mj/lm
</body>
