<header id=048199>
Published Date: 2011-08-20 16:21:00 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Venezuelan equine encephalitis, equine - Mexico
Archive Number: 20110820.2533
</header>
<body id=048199>
VENEZUELAN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS, EQUINE - MEXICO
***********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 19 Aug 2011
Source: Texas Animal Health Commission official news release [edited]
http://www.tahc.state.tx.us


Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis (VEE) Confirmed in Mexico
--------------------------------------------------------
Due to recent cases of Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE) in
Southern Mexico, horse owners and veterinarians are encouraged to be
alert to any clinical signs of illness that could indicate VEE.
Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE) is a non-contagious viral
infection of horses and other equids that can cause a severe and often
fatal encephalitis/encephalomyelitis, which is defined as an
inflammation of the brain and spinal cord.

VEE is typically found in Central and South America, but due to the
recent case of a horse that died of VEE in Southern Mexico, the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) issued an import alert for 4
states in Mexico. Effective immediately, and until further notice,
horses and other equids from the states of Tamaulipas, Veracruz,
Tabasco, and Chiapas or that have transited through these states are
required to undergo a 7-day quarantine and observation for VEE in a
vector-proof (double-screened) quarantine facility, rather than the
standard 3-day quarantine prior to entry into the U.S. The particular
VEE virus being reported by Mexico is considered an endemic strain,
which doesn't normally cause disease in equids. The import alert
issued by USDA is a precautionary measure due to the one horse in the
State of Tabasco that has died from the virus. The severe outbreak
that occurred in Texas in 1971 was caused by a different, more
virulent strain of the virus.

Clinical signs of VEE include moderate to high fever, depression, lack
of appetite, cranial nerve deficits (facial paralysis, tongue
weakness, difficulty swallowing), behavioral changes (aggression,
self-mutilation, or drowsiness), gait abnormalities, or severe central
nervous system signs, such as head-pressing, circling, blindness, and
seizures. VEE is usually transmitted by mosquitoes, and infrequently
by other bloodsucking insects. People may also be infected by
mosquitoes, but horse-to-horse and horse-to-human transmission is
uncommon. VEE is highly pathogenic in horses. It can also cause
illness in humans.

VEE is a foreign animal disease, reportable to both the TAHC and the
Department of State Health Services due to the potential for human
illness. Vaccination may interfere with testing for the disease, so
veterinarians need to weigh the potential risks and benefits of
vaccinating an individual horse that might be tested for export.

"There have been no reported cases of VEE in recent years in Texas.
However, our close proximity to Mexico means that we will be keeping a
close eye on any cases across the border and determining whether any
further regulatory action will be needed," said Dr. Andy Schwartz,
TAHC State Epidemiologist. "Vaccination and other protective measures
for all equine including West Nile virus, Western and Eastern equine
encephalitis (WEE/EEE) should be discussed with your veterinarian."

For more information about VEE visit
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/easter_wester_venezuelan_equine_encephalomyelitis.pdf.

For the American Association of Equine Practitioner VEE vaccination
guidelines, visit
http://www.aaep.org/eee_wee.htm.

For import requirements, go to the USDA Center for Import/Export:
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/import_export/animals/animal_import/equine/equine_import_quarantine.shtml

Founded in 1893, the Texas Animal Health Commission works to protect
the health of all Texas livestock, including: cattle, swine, poultry,
sheep, goats, equine animals, and exotic livestock.

--
Communicated by:
Bonnie Ramirez
Texas Animal Health Commission
Austin, TX 78758
<bonnie.ramirez@tahc.state.tx.us>
<www.tahc.state.tx.us>

[In the 1970's a similar situation presented itself and the disease
romped right into Texas and to many other states in the southern USA.

There is a vaccine for horses. The vaccine was originally developed
for people and adapted for horses. The vaccine seems to be in limited
use for people.

Let us hope we do not see a repeat of the situation in the 1970's
where horses died and people in the southern US were very concerned.

As there is a vaccine for horses, horse owners are advised to start
vaccinating. This warning from the Texas Animal Health Commission
should not be taken lightly. - Mod.TG]

[The VEE virus subtype most likely to be circulating in southern
Mexico and causing equine cases is IE. Fortunately, historically it
has not spread as widely as the "epizoodemic" type IAB or IC, which
caused the massive outbreak in equine animals and humans in Central
America, Mexico reaching southern Texas in 1969-71 and has continued
to cause sporadic outbreaks in northern South America . - Mod. TY]

[The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for Mexico is available at:
http://healthmap.org/r/009U - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
2010
----
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, equine - Colombia (02): (CO) 20100811.2752
Venezuelan equine encephalitis, equine - Colombia 20100726.2507
.................................................mhj/tg/ejp/mpp/ty/mpp
</body>
