<header id=060374>
Published Date: 2009-09-11 12:00:05 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (45): antiviral resistance
Archive Number: 20090911.3207
</header>
<body id=060374>
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC (H1N1) 2009 (45): ANTIVIRAL RESISTANCE
*********************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Fri 11 Sep 2009
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2009 58(35); 969-72 [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5835a1.htm?s_cid=3Dmm5835a1_x>


Oseltamivir-resistant pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 virus
infection in 2 summer campers receiving prophylaxis - North Carolina, 2009
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Initial testing of the pandemic influenza A (H1N1) 2009 virus found
it susceptible to neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir and
zanamivir) and resistant to adamantanes (amantadine and rimantadine)
(1). Neuraminidase inhibitors have been used widely for treatment and
chemoprophylaxis of 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1); however,
sporadic cases of oseltamivir-resistant 2009 pandemic influenza A
(H1N1) virus infection have been reported worldwide (2), including 9
US cases identified as of 4 Sep 2009 [Additional information
available at <http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/fluactivity.htm>]. On 14
Jul 2009, CDC was contacted by a physician at a summer camp in North
Carolina regarding 2 cases of influenza-like illness (ILI) in
adolescent girls receiving oseltamivir chemoprophylaxis during an ILI
outbreak that had begun 18 Jun 2009. The 2 girls stayed in the same
cabin, and both received oseltamivir during a mass chemoprophylaxis
program in which approximately 600 campers and staff members received
oseltamivir or zanamivir. On 20 Jul and 22 Jul 2009, the North
Carolina State Laboratory of Public Health confirmed pandemic H1N1
virus infection in respiratory specimens from both girls. On 14 Aug
and 19 Aug 2009, CDC detected the H275Y mutation (N1 numbering) in
neuraminidase from both specimens by pyrosequencing (3,4). The H275Y
mutation is associated with resistance to oseltamivir; zanamivir
susceptibility is retained. A 2nd mutation (I223V) in neuraminidase
also was detected in both specimens. This is the 1st report of
oseltamivir resistance in pandemic H1N1 cases with an epidemiologic
link. Health-care providers should be aware that antiviral resistance
can develop during chemoprophylaxis or treatment with subtherapeutic
dosages and should follow published recommendations for antiviral
medications (5).

The summer camp offered 2 4-week sessions. The 1st session was
conducted from 14 Jun to 10 Jul 2009, followed by a weekend break,
11-12 Jul 2009, before the start of the 2nd session on 13 Jul 2009.
Approximately 650 campers and 350 staff members participated in the
1st session, and 350 campers and 300 staff members participated in
the 2nd session. An outbreak of ILI began on 18 Jun 2009, soon after
the start of the 1st session; the last case was diagnosed on 22 Jul
2009. All ill persons were grouped in isolation until 7 days after
symptom onset and until well. All but one of the 61 ill campers and 4
ill staff members received treatment with either oseltamivir or
zanamivir. Also, beginning on 18 Jun 2009, medical staff members
conducted a mass program of antiviral chemoprophylaxis in which
prophylactic oseltamivir or zanamivir was administered to all persons
who had an ill sibling at the camp and to all persons who lived in a
cabin with an ill person. Chemoprophylaxis was administered daily by
camp staff members to ensure compliance. Over the 2 sessions, a total
of 418 campers and 189 staff members received 10 days of
chemoprophylaxis with either oseltamivir (75 mg or appropriate
weight-based dosing, once daily) or zanamivir (2 5-mg inhalations,
once daily). The camp medical staff continued the program until 24 Jul 2009.

Case reports
------------
Patient A. One of the campers, a previously healthy adolescent girl,
received oseltamivir prophylaxis at an appropriate prophylactic dose
of 75 mg daily during 26 Jun-5 Jul 2009, despite having no reported
exposure to an ill person. After completing the initial course of
oseltamivir on 5 Jul 2009, she was exposed to an ill cabin mate
(patient C) and administered a 2nd 10-day course of chemoprophylaxis
at the same dosage beginning on 7 Jul 2009. On 8 Jul 2009, she
experienced cough and headache without fever, and on 9 Jul 2009 she
experienced chills, worsening headache, and loose stools. Despite
these symptoms, her oseltamivir dose was not increased to a
therapeutic treatment dose. On 10 Jul 2009, the last day of the 1st
camp session, she traveled away from camp with 3 family members while
ill, returning on 12 Jul 2009, afebrile and with a cough, to attend
the 2nd session. On 12 Jul 2009, a rapid influenza detection test was
positive for influenza A. The family declined treatment with
zanamivir because of concern over side effects, and the patient's
oseltamivir dose was doubled to 75 mg, twice daily, an appropriate
therapeutic treatment dose. Patient A was isolated with other ill
campers and staff members until 16 Jul 2009, and she recovered
uneventfully. The camp physician observed that the camper became ill
while taking prophylaxis and became concerned that antiviral
resistance might have occurred. Therefore, a nasopharyngeal swab
specimen was obtained on 14 Jul 2009 and sent to the state laboratory
for testing. On 22 Jul 2009, the laboratory confirmed the presence of
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR). On 19 Aug 2009,
CDC testing of the same clinical specimen detected the H275Y (3,4)
and I223V mutations (6). Because viral isolation was unsuccessful, a
neuraminidase inhibition assay was not performed. No illness was
reported among her family members.

Patient B. A 2nd previously healthy adolescent girl, who resided in
the same cabin as patient A, began oseltamivir chemoprophylaxis at a
dose of 75 mg daily on 7 Jul 2009 after exposure to patient C. On 10
Jul 2009, patient B left camp for a home visit during the break
between camp sessions. The next day, while at home, she experienced
onset of fever (101.9 deg F [38.8 deg C]), sore throat, and cough.
She continued to engage in normal activities while ill, including
visiting a shopping mall and movie theater. She returned to camp for
the 2nd session on 12 Jul 2009 with fever, headache, cough, malaise,
and myalgias. On 12 Jul 2009, a rapid influenza detection test was
positive for influenza A. Oseltamivir was discontinued, and zanamivir
treatment (2 5-mg inhalations, twice daily) was begun. A
nasopharyngeal swab specimen was obtained 14 Jul 2009 and sent to the
state laboratory for testing. On 20 Jul 2009, the presence of 2009
pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus was confirmed by rRT-PCR. On 14 Aug
2009, CDC testing of viral RNA detected H275Y and I223V mutations
(3,4,6). Viral isolation was unsuccessful, and a neuraminidase
inhibition assay was not performed. Patient B was isolated at the
camp during 12-18 Jul 2009. Her fever resolved by 14 Jul, and by 17
Jul 2009 she was asymptomatic. No illnesses were identified among
close contacts potentially exposed during her weekend home visit.

Further transmission investigation
----------------------------------
After identification of the oseltamivir-resistant pandemic H1N1
virus, the state health department and local health departments
interviewed the families of the 2 campers and reviewed camp medical
records to determine whether the campers might have transmitted virus
to others. Retrospective review of camp records revealed that, during
26 Jun-22 Jul 2009, 6 other campers were diagnosed with illness while
on oseltamivir chemoprophylaxis (75 mg once daily for 10 days). A
single specimen from one of these 6 campers (not patient C) was
obtained 14 Jul 2009 and sent to the state laboratory for testing by
rRT-PCR, but no influenza virus was isolated. No evidence of pandemic
H1N1 virus infection outside the camp linked to either patient A or
patient B was found. CDC tested by pyrosequencing 59 specimens of
pandemic H1N1 virus, collected during 29 Jun-14 Aug 2009 as part of
routine surveillance conducted by sentinel sites throughout North
Carolina. None of the 59 specimens had the H275Y or I223V mutations.

[Reported by: M Garrison, Buncombe County Health Center; L Weldon,
Henderson County Dept of Public Health; P Brantley, L Wolf, PhD, M
Davies, MD, J-M Maillard, MD, Z Moore, MD, North Carolina Dept of
Health and Human Svcs. T Sheu, V Deyde, PhD, L Gubareva, PhD, AM Fry,
MD, Influenza Div, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases; A Fleischauer, PhD, Career Epidemiology Field Officer
Program, Coordinating Office for Terrorism Preparedness and Emergency
Response; NJ Dailey, MD, EIS Officer, CDC.]

MMWR editorial note
-------------------
This report describes confirmed oseltamivir-resistant 2009 pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) virus infection in 2 previously healthy
adolescents who were cabin mates and recipients of oseltamivir in a
mass chemoprophylaxis program during an outbreak of ILI at a summer
camp. This is the 1st report of oseltamivir resistance in symptomatic
close contacts with confirmed infection. 2 possible mechanisms of
transmission seem most likely. One possibility is that
oseltamivir-resistant virus was transmitted from patient A to patient
B. The onset of illness for patient B occurred 4 days after the onset
of illness for patient A, consistent with reported intervals for
secondary transmission among household members with seasonal
influenza (7). Alternatively, both patient A and patient B might have
acquired oseltamivir-resistant virus infection from exposure to
another ill person (such as, an unknown camper or staff member, or
patient C), or each might have developed oseltamivir resistance
independently. Whether the H275Y and I223V mutations occurred
independently, or whether virus with one or both of these mutations
circulated more widely in the camp could not be determined.

Although 6 other persons had illness while receiving oseltamivir
chemoprophylaxis, aside from the specimens collected from patients A
and B, only one specimen was obtained from any other ill person, and
the pandemic H1N1 virus was not detected in that specimen. Neither
mutation was found in 59 surveillance specimens from sentinel sites
in the state, suggesting that the mutations were not widespread in
North Carolina. The H275Y mutation has been characterized previously
among seasonal influenza A (H1N1) viruses and is associated with
resistance to oseltamivir (3). The I223V mutation has not been
reported previously in 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1); because the
neuraminidase inhibition assay could not be performed, the mutation's
functional significance is unknown.

These cases highlight a potentially adverse outcome from oseltamivir
chemoprophylaxis. In 2 randomized clinical trials (with 962 and 812
participants, respectively), the efficacy of oseltamivir
chemoprophylaxis for preventing clinical seasonal influenza among
persons within households ranged from 68 percent (for
laboratory-confirmed infection that included serologic outcomes of
infection) to 89 percent (for laboratory-confirmed clinical
influenza) (8,9). No evidence of oseltamivir-resistant virus was
reported in these studies. However, the World Health Organization has
reported multiple instances of oseltamivir-resistant 2009 pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) viruses being isolated from persons who developed
pandemic H1N1 infection while receiving oseltamivir chemoprophylaxis
(2). Resistance to oseltamivir also might develop during
subtherapeutic dosing. In this report, patient A was symptomatic
while on a chemoprophylaxis dose of oseltamivir for 4 days. One
possibility is that she developed resistance while on a
subtherapeutic dosage of 75 mg once a day for chemoprophylaxis,
rather than the appropriate treatment dose of 75 mg twice a day.

CDC recommendations regarding use of antivirals during the H1N1
pandemic were updated on 8 Sep 2009. Use of antiviral medications for
postexposure chemoprophylaxis should be reserved for persons at
higher risk for influenza-related complications who have had contact
with someone likely to have been infected with influenza. An emphasis
on early treatment once a patient has developed symptoms, rather than
chemoprophylaxis, should reduce opportunities for development of
oseltamivir resistance (5). Chemoprophylaxis should not be used for
prevention of illness among healthy persons after exposures in
community settings. Persons who are taking antiviral medications for
prevention should be instructed to contact a health-care provider if
illness develops. Persons under antiviral treatment should be
instructed to contact a health-care provider if symptoms worsen.
Other preventative measures (such as, hand hygiene and cough
etiquette) can reduce the risk for influenza virus transmission (5).

Chemoprophylaxis failure is known to occur even without antiviral
resistance (8,9). Accordingly, not all failures need to be
accompanied by testing for resistance; testing should be considered
for individual cases in consultation with the state health
department. However, if symptoms develop during chemoprophylaxis,
providers should consider the possibility of antiviral resistance and
consider alternate treatment options. Because the 2009 pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) virus is resistant to adamantanes (1), limited
treatment options will be available if widespread oseltamivir
resistance develops. Zanamivir is not licensed for treatment of
children aged less than 7 years and is contraindicated among persons
with underlying airway disease.

References
----------
1. CDC: Drug susceptibility of swine-origin influenza A (H1N1)
viruses, April 2009. MMWR 2009; 58 :433-5. Available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5816a6.htm>].
2. World Health Organization: Pandemic (H1N1) 2009: update 60.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2009. Available at
<http://www.who.int/csr/don/2009_08_04/en/index.html>.
3. Deyde VM, Gubareva LV: Influenza genome analysis using
pyrosequencing method: current applications for a moving target.
Expert Rev Mol Diagn 2009; 9: 493-509 [abstract available at
<http://www.expert-reviews.com/doi/abs/10.1586/erm.09.21>].
4. World Health Organization: Influenza A (H1N1) NA-H274 detailed
pyrosequencing protocol for antiviral susceptibility testing. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2009. Available at
http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/swineflu/NA_DetailedPyrosequencing_20090513.pdf.
5. CDC: Updated interim recommendations for the use of antiviral
medications in the treatment and prevention of influenza for the
2009--2010 season. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 8 Sep, 2009. Available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/recommendations.htm>.
6. Garten RJ, Davis CT, Russell CA, et al: Antigenic and genetic
characteristics of swine-origin 2009 A(H1N1) influenza viruses
circulating in humans. Science 2009; 325: 197-201 [available at
<http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/325/5937/197>].
7. Cowling BJ, Fang VJ, Riley S, et al: Estimation of the serial
interval of influenza. Epidemiology 2009; 20: 344-7 [abstract available at
<http://journals.lww.com/epidem/Abstract/2009/05000/Estimation_of_the_Serial_Interval_of_Influenza.7.aspx>].
8. Welliver R, Monto AS, Carewicz O, et al: Effectiveness of
oseltamivir in preventing influenza in household contacts: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001; 285: 748-54 [available at
<http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/full/285/6/748>].
9. Hayden FG, Belshe R, Villanueva C, et al: Management of influenza
in households: a prospective, randomized comparison of oseltamivir
treatment with or without postexposure prophylaxis. J Infect Dis
2004; 189: 440-9 [available at
<http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/381128>].

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[The essential message is that health-care providers should be aware
that antiviral resistance can develop during chemoprophylaxis or
treatment with subtherapeutic dosages and they should follow
published recommendations for antiviral medications (available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/recommendations.htm>.

The effect of the I223V mutation, which has not been observed
previously, on the activity of the viral neuraminidase has not been
determined because of the failure to isolate infectious virus from
the 2 patients. - Mod.CP]

[North Carolina can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map of the US at
<http://healthmap.org/r/00CA>. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (44): receptor binding 20090910.3192
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (43): pediatric questions 20090909.3185
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (42): China, pork consumption 20090907.3146
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (41): Iran 20090906.3140
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (40): global update 20090906.3138
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (39): pediatric deaths 20090904.3118
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (38): 10 S.Amer. presidents exposed
20090831.3063
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (37): 2nd wave plan, WHO 20090830.3042
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (36): USA (IL), NZ 20090828.3032
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (35): NZ surveillance 20090827.3022
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (30): assumptions 20090813.2879
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (20): Peru, 33 percent asymptomatic
20090730.2668
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (10): vaccine 20090720.2577
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 - Viet Nam: patient data 20090708.2450
...................................cp/mj/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
