<header id=063894>
Published Date: 2011-08-21 19:57:18 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever - Venezuela: (PO)
Archive Number: 20110821.2548
</header>
<body id=063894>
VENEZUELAN HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - VENEZUELA: (PORTUGUESA)
******************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 20 Aug 2011
Source: El Nacional [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited]
http://www.el-nacional.com/www/site/p_contenido.php?q=nodo/230680/Regiones/Un-muerto-por-fiebre-hemorr√°gica-venezolana


A woman has died, and there are 3 other individuals with Venezuelan
hemorrhagic fever in the Banco Morrones village of the Guaranarito
municipality, reported Antonio Brito, Regional Director of Health,
yesterday [19 Aug 2011]. The disease [virus] is transmitted through
rodent feces and is characteristic of the said jurisdiction of
Portuguesa state.

Brito stated that the deceased was a woman of 50 years of age who did
not seek medical attention in time and that the cases should not be a
cause of alarm because state epidemiological statistics show peaks of
infection in the rainy season, as is the current situation.
Nonetheless, he indicated that an alert was activated in Banco
Morrones to avoid the development of new cases of the infection and
that the 4 detected cases were registered in the last 2 weeks.

He said that in Portuguesa, the Center for Virological Research has
developed a treatment for hemorrhagic fever but that it is effective
[only] if it is administered during the early stages of the disease.
He added that the person who died sought medical attention from 7-8
days after symptoms started; thus, there was nothing that anyone could
do.

The symptoms of the disease include arthralgia, fever and bleeding
gums. Individuals who present with this clinical picture must seek
medical attention quickly in order to have an evaluation and, if
necessary, be admitted to the Dr Miguel Oraa hospital of Guanare,
which piloted the treatment of the disease.

Brito recommended that the residents of rural areas in Portuguesa,
especially in Guanarito, not store rice or wheat in their houses,
because this attracts rodents; he recommended that they spray patios
with water before cleaning to avoid raising dust that could be
contaminated with rodent feces; that they use gloves and boots when
working in the field, and that they take precautions when creating any
kind of dust.

The Director of Health indicated that 14 medical students of the
Escuela Latinoamericana are in Banco Morrones to advise the population
as of this past Saturday [13 Aug 2011?].

[Byline: Daniel Espana]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-ESP
<promed-esp@promedmail.org>

[Guanarito virus infections cause Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever. In
1989, there was an outbreak of a severe febrile illness in Portuguesa
state, mainly among male and female rural inhabitants of all ages in
the southern part of the state, characterized by fever, headache,
myalgia, sore throat, weakness, anorexia, nausea, vomiting and
occasionally convulsions. Since then, there have been sporadic cases,
with a 40 per cent case fatality rate.

The rodent reservoirs are the cotton rat _Sigmodon alstoni_ and the
cane mouse _Zygodontomys brevicauda_. Guanarito virus is an arenavirus
related to 2 other South American arenaviruses: Machupo virus
(Bolivian hemorrhagic fever), and Junin virus (Argentina hemorrhagic
fever).

An image of _Sigmodon alstoni_ can be accessed at
http://monde.des.mammiferes.free.fr/Placentaires/Rodentia/Cricetidae/Sigmodon%20hispidus.jpg
and _Zygodontomys brevicauda_ at
http://www6.ufrgs.br/favet/imunovet/molecular_immunology/Peromyscusmaniculatus.jpg.

WHO has a fact sheet on Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever accessible at
http://www.paho.org/english/sha/epibul_95-98/be953vhf.htm..

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map showing the location of
Guanarito can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/19Mf. - Mod.TY]
See Also
2002
----
Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever - Venezuela (02) 20020204.3479
.................................................mpp/ty/msp/mpp
</body>
