<header id=012945>
Published Date: 2011-10-04 06:44:37 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (08): (MI)
Archive Number: 20111004.2986
</header>
<body id=012945>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (08): (MICHIGAN)
*************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sun 2 Oct 2011
Source: South Bend Tribune [edited]
http://www.southbendtribune.com/sports/sbt-outdoors-questions-open-bow-season-20111002,0,770238.column


As deer hunters prepared for bow season, which opened Saturday [1 Oct
2011] on both sides of the [Michigan] state line, there's some
trepidation in the minds of Michigan archers.

The EHD [epizootic hemorrhagic disease] that killed deer last season
[2010] has returned. It appears to be spreading in Cass County and may
have spilled over to Michigan's St. Joseph County as well.

There have been no reports in Indiana -- yet.

Epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) was confirmed by Michigan DNR
[Department of Natural Resources] last week [20 Sep 2011] in dead
animals it collected. Reports of more dying deer continue to be filed
from Cass County. The disease hit Cass County last year [2010] and
killed an estimated 200 animals.

"We've received about 100 calls into our Plainwell office," said Crane
Pond Property Manager Steve Chadwick last week. "Most are from the
Dowagiac area, but we are now testing 2 dead deer found in the Three
Rivers area."

EHD is a virus that impacts deer and is not considered a threat to
humans. Sick or dying deer are usually found near water. It's carried
by a biting bug that should die out after the 1st hard frost.

Despite the EHD outbreak, biologists predict a season similar to last
year.

Northern Indiana wildlife biologist Linda Byer said in an email that
she received a lot of complaints from landowners suffering from crop
depredation. "That tells me deer numbers are still high," she noted.

As always, weather and crop harvest will impact early bow season
successes. Some of the seed corn is being picked but most of the
standing corn remains intact, giving deer additional places to hide.

"I would imagine the deer are still in summer patterns for a few weeks
before shifting to the pre-rut period," said Chadwick. "Once more corn
comes down, they'll start moving more."

The Michigan biologist expects the EHD outbreak to affect hunting in
those areas hit hardest. On the other hand, he noted, those areas hit
last year [2010] could produce bigger ones. "If the habitat recovered
that offers more food for the survivors to grow big and healthy," he
explained. "Typically, when deer numbers drop in an area, the ones
that survive do well."

There were very few changes in either state's deer regulations for
this year [2011], although Michigan has reinstated legalized baiting.
Baiting is illegal in Indiana.

Indiana will institute major changes next year [2012].

Michigan hunters should know that baiting could facilitate the spread
of EHD as the virus is passed from one animal to another. Put an
infected deer feeding over a bait pile alongside healthy ones, and the
problem manifests.

Hoosier hunters are reminded they are required to check any killed
deer at an official check station. The list is located in the back of
the hunting guide.

Michigan's deer check-in is voluntary although hunters who do it
receive a commemorative shoulder patch. The nearest check-in location
is at the Plainwell, Michigan. DNR office. Crane Pond no longer checks
deer during the bow season.

[Byline: Louie Stout]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) is the most important disease of
white-tailed deer. Outbreaks are common in the Southeastern USA, but
they are also frequently documented further north. The disease is
transmitted by biting midges and its occurrence is seasonal. The
die-offs cease with the 1st frosts. The EHD virus does not pose a risk
for human or livestock health. High density deer herds may have higher
mortality rates; however, the relationship of deer density to the
severity of hemorrhagic disease is not clear-cut, as the virus is not
spread by direct contact and depends on the dynamics of the arthropod
vector. For more information on the disease see comments in
ProMED-mail post 20110918.2842. - Mod.PMB]

[The state of Michigan can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/1iS-. Cass and St Joseph
counties in southwestern Michigan can be seen on the map at
http://www.digital-topo-maps.com/county-map/michigan.shtml. -
Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (07): (MI) 20110921.2870
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (06): (NJ, PA)
200110918.2842
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (05): (NY) 20110911.2767
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (04): (NJ) 20110911.2762
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (03): (KS,MT) 20110904.2704
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ) 20110826.2601
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
.................................................sb/pmb/mj/ml
</body>
