<header id=007304>
Published Date: 2011-10-21 06:11:21 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (09): (ND,MT)
Archive Number: 20111021.3137
</header>
<body id=007304>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (09): (NORTH DAKOTA,
MONTANA)
**************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 18 Oct 2011
Source: The Republic, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]
http://www.therepublic.com/view/story/d96884cd9b8342f988f81cd27bf969f1/ND--Deer-Disease/


North Dakota officials announced on Tuesday [18 Oct 2011] that they
are suspending the sale of some remaining deer hunting licenses and
offered refunds to the holders of 13 000 licenses that already have
been sold after detecting a disease that kills white-tailed deer in
much of the west of the state.

The state Game and Fish Department began receiving isolated reports in
August [2011] of deer deaths from epizootic hemorrhagic disease [EHD],
wildlife chief Randy Kreil said. With pheasant hunting season under
way, reports have intensified to a "steady stream," he said. "We've
had about 120 reports, totaling about 300 dead deer," he said. "The
1st week of pheasant season is the real telltale sign of the intensity
and extent of the outbreak. It's not a scientific survey by any means,
but at the same time it's pretty clear and convincing evidence."

Kreil said it is difficult to estimate how many deer might have died
but the outbreak appears to be the biggest since 2000. Environmental
conditions were similar that year, with warm and wet conditions in
late summer and early fall that are conducive to the development of
the insects that transmit the disease, he said.

The disease is almost always fatal to white-tailed deer though not to
mule deer, which have a different immune system. It is not known to
affect people.

There also have been reports of EHD this year [2011] in other states,
from Kansas to Montana. "I think it's just one of those years," said
Steve Griffin, a wildlife biologist in Rapid City with the South
Dakota Game, Fish and Parks Department.

The outbreak has been severe in pockets of central and eastern
Montana, said Ron Selden, a spokesman in Glasgow for Montana Fish,
Wildlife and Parks. While the disease is not rare, it's usually not so
widespread, he said. Selden said Montana's white-tailed deer
population suffered a "triple hit" this year -- record cold and snow
last winter [2010-11], spring and summer flooding, and now EHD. It
could take 2 years for the population to rebound even if this winter
is good, he said.

In North Dakota, the EHD outbreak could significantly reduce the
number of hunting licenses available next year [2012], Kreil said.
About 110 000 licenses were made available this year -- the fewest in
10 years -- following 3 successive harsh winters. That number will
drop even more when the department suspends the sale of the remaining
licenses in 3 southwestern hunting units Friday [21 Oct 2011]. About
1500 deer licenses remained Tuesday. License sales were not suspended
immediately because some people might still want to hunt in those
areas, Kreil said. "There are areas that have been affected and areas
that have not been affected," he said. "We want to leave it up to the
people."

Kreil did not expect many license holders to ask for refunds. When a
similar offer was made to the holders of 3000 licenses in 2000, less
than 100 were returned, he said. "People like to go deer hunting. They
like to be out with their friends," he said. "They'll take their
chances." The 2011 deer gun season opens at noon 4 Nov 2011 and runs
through 20 Nov 2011.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[North Dakota and Montana can be seen on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/1m88. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ

Many areas have been flooded this year, while other areas in the south
would love to have rain. It has made for a very unusual year for EHD
and for other diseases like eastern equine encephalitis. Hurricanes
have carried mosquitoes and midges to areas that are not normally so
hard hit by some of these diseases.

Clearly the ND area has suffered quite a loss, at least in some
regions, to be willing to offer hunting license refunds.

The epizootic hemorrhagic disease viruses belong to the genus
_Orbivirus_, family _Reoviridae_. Of the 10 serotypes of EHDV known
worldwide, the only 2 serotypes currently endemic in North America are
EHDV-1 and EHDV-2.

The viruses of the EHDV serogroup are transmitted by biological
vectors, usually biting midges in the genus _Culicoides_. In North
America, _C. variipennis_ is the major vector. Some species of gnats
and mosquitoes can also transmit EHDV. Infected deer can be viremic
for up to 2 months.

The incubation period for epizootic hemorrhagic disease in deer is
5-10 days.

Three syndromes may be seen in deer. Peracute disease is characterized
by high fever, anorexia, weakness, respiratory distress, and severe
and rapid edema of the head and neck. Swelling of the tongue and
conjunctivae is common. Deer with the peracute form usually die
rapidly, typically within 8-36 hours; some animals may be found dead
with few clinical signs. In the acute form (classical EHD), these
signs may be accompanied by extensive hemorrhages in many tissues
including the skin, heart, and gastrointestinal tract. There is often
excessive salivation and nasal discharge, both of which may be
blood-tinged. Animals with the acute form can also develop ulcers or
erosions of the tongue, dental pad, palate, rumen, and omasum. High
mortality rates are common in both the peracute and acute forms.

In the chronic form, deer are ill for several weeks but gradually
recover. After recovery, these deer sometimes develop breaks or rings
in the hooves caused by growth interruptions, and may become lame. In
severe cases, animals slough the hoof wall or toe; some of these deer
may be found crawling on their knees or chest. Deer with the chronic
form may also develop ulcers, scars, or erosions in the rumen;
extensive damage to the lining of the rumen can cause emaciation even
when there is no shortage of food.

In North America, most outbreaks of epizootic hemorrhagic disease
occur in late summer or early autumn, and are often associated with
wet weather. The onset of freezing weather usually stops the
appearance of new cases, but hoof sloughing can be seen throughout the
year. Among the _Cervidae_, epizootic hemorrhagic disease is most
severe in white-tailed deer. In this species, the morbidity and
mortality rates may be as high as 90 per cent. However, the severity
of the disease varies from year to year. It also varies with the
geographic location. In the south eastern US, most cases are mild, and
the mortality rates are low. In the midwest and north east, EHD
typically recurs each year, but can vary from a few scattered cases to
severe epizootics with high mortality rates. This variability is
thought to be caused by many factors including the abundance and
distribution of the insect vectors, the EHDV serotype, existing herd
immunity, and genetic variations in the susceptibility of the host.
Surviving deer develop long-lived neutralizing antibodies. Nearly 100
per cent of the deer population can be seropositive in some regions.

Acute or peracute EHD should be suspected in deer with swelling of the
head and neck, respiratory distress, or excessive blood-tinged
salivation. This disease should also be considered in cases of sudden
death, particularly when the animal is found dead near water (an
indication of high fever). Chronic disease can be the cause of hoof
abnormalities and emaciation.

In deer, the differential diagnosis includes foot-and-mouth disease,
bluetongue, and plant photosensitization. A hemorrhagic disease caused
by an adenovirus has also been described in deer in California.

Although epizootic hemorrhagic disease is endemic in the US, it is a
reportable disease in some states. State authorities should be
consulted for more specific information. Only EHDV-1 and EHDV-2 are
currently found in the US.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/epizootic_hemorrhagic_disease.pdf.
- Mod.TG]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (08): (MI) 20111004.2986
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (07): (MI) 20110921.2870
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (06): (NJ, PA)
200110918.2842
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (05): (NY) 20110911.2767
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (04): (NJ) 20110911.2762
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (03): (KS,MT) 20110904.2704
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ) 20110826.2601
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
.................................................sb/tg/mj/sh
</body>
