<header id=039479>
Published Date: 2011-11-07 11:13:43 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed febrile illness - India (02): (WB) RFI
Archive Number: 20111107.3315
</header>
<body id=039479>
UNDIAGNOSED FEBRILE ILLNESS - INDIA (02): (WEST BENGAL) REQUEST FOR
INFORMATION
*********************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 4 Nov 2011
Source: The Times of India, Times News Network (TNN) [edited]
http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2011-11-04/kolkata/30358884_1_mystery-fever-haemorrhagic-hanta-virus


Fear stalks the dusty, pot-holed lanes of Nilkanthapur -- a poor
village on the East and West Midnapore border, 170 km [106 mi] from
Kolkata. A killer virus, that has taken half-a-dozen lives in the last
3 years, is back to torment the area and its poor inhabitants who have
little access to proper healthcare. It could be [a] deadly hantavirus
or Korean haemorrhagic fever that has a 50 per cent mortality rate,
some experts fear. Even though a confirmation is awaited from the
National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune and the School of Tropical
Medicine (STM) in Kolkata that had sent teams to collect blood samples
from the affected area on Wednesday [2 Nov 2011], the symptoms of the
fever that has been striking villagers have been chillingly similar to
that of [a] hantavirus [infection]. NIV and STM teams will visit the
village on Fri 4 Nov 2011.

A 10 year old boy and his neighbour, a boy of 6, have had a narrow
escape. The 2 young boys, in a critical state, had to be taken to the
Institute of Child Health (ICH) in Kolkata for treatment. They have
survived but still have a low fever that has kept their parents
worried and neighbours in anxiety. While one was released a fortnight
back, the other returned from Kolkata on Thursday [3 Nov 2011]. Both
are frail and can barely walk. Scores of others in the village are
suffering from a similar fever. Since 2008, there has been an outbreak
in the area every October.

"Initially, we took it to be a normal fever, but it refused to go
away. After a week, he turned very weak and then started having these
bouts of delirium and a splitting headache. It was followed by several
spells of convulsion. One of the boys would scream out in pain and
fall unconscious. We were terrified since the symptoms were close to
the mystery fever that has plagued our village so we rushed him to the
local Bhagabanpur health centre. They failed to do anything and
referred us to Kolkata," said the boy's father.

For the next one week, the boy's temperature kept fluctuating and he
went on slipping into spells of unconsciousness. Several blood and
biochemical tests failed to diagnose the illness. His release report
says the boy has enteric encephalopathy or ..... His parents have no
idea if the boy is indeed suffering from ..... for doctors have not
told them anything. "It seems to be that mystery fever. We are scared
and have been using mosquito nets. The experts who came here on
Wednesday [2 Nov 2011] have asked us to be cautious about insect bites
and rats. But is that enough?" asked [a villager]. He recalled how he
had rushed to Kolkata last year [2010] with a neighbour suffering from
the fever but she died at the Beliaghata ID Hospital. "She never
regained consciousness once the fever struck," said [the villager].

[The 10 year old] has not been able to move without his mother's
support ever since he returned home early on Thursday [3 Nov 2011].
Feeble and thin -- he has lost 4 kg [9 lbs) over last fortnight -- he
could just stare from his mother's lap as the local quack checked his
reports from ICH. It says the boy's fever is "under investigation".
The viral culture report is pending from STM.

"We can only keep our fingers crossed and hope for the best. Let's
hope the worst is over," said the boy's mother. She has never heard of
hantavirus but knows the mystery fever. "It's dangerous. We have seen
our neighbours die within hours," she mumbled, widening her eyes in
horror.

The fever has been striking in neighbouring Mongorajpur as well, a
village in Sabang of West Midnapore -- 3 have succumbed to it since
2009. A patient from Patashpur is now admitted in a Kolkata hospital.
The symptoms have been identical -- low fever for a week followed by a
sudden spell of delirium, vomiting, and convulsion. A farmer lost his
wife to the fever in 2009. "She had this slight temperature for about
a fortnight. One afternoon, she fainted and then started vomiting. By
the time it stopped, she was hardly breathing. We rushed her to a
Tamluk hospital and from there to the ID Hospital in Kolkata. No
medicine worked," said [the farmer]. Doctors told him that [his wife]
'possibly' had Japanese encephalitis. "It was the mystery fever, for
sure," said the farmer. [2 of] his neighbours fell prey to the fever
in 2010.

The visit by experts has failed to assure villagers. It would be
difficult to contain the virus, given the unhygienic environment of
the village and the areas around it, they pointed out. If it's
hantavirus, then it could spread through rodents and cattle [rodents
and perhaps other small mammals, not cattle, are reservoirs should
this prove to be a hantavirus. - Mod.TY], they have been warned.
"There's no way we can do away with either. While every household has
got cattle, rodents can't be checked since there is filth all around.
We must wait for November to pass without further deaths. That's the
best we can hope for," said a villager.

The district health administration said it was monitoring the
situation. "The experts will visit once again on Fri 4 Nov 2011. There
is yet no confirmation on the virus and we are waiting for the reports
from STM and NIV," said chief medical officer (CMOH) Sukumar Das.

[Byline: Prithvijit Mitra, Suman Mondal]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This report does not provide enough information to hazard a
diagnosis. Since there is no mention of hemorrhagic or renal signs,
Puumala (known to be in India), Seoul (likely to be there also), and
Hantaan hantaviruses seem unlikely. Chandipura, Japanese encephalitis,
and West Nile viruses are other possible pathogens that might be
involved in these cases, but will need to be confirmed or ruled out by
laboratory tests. ProMED-mail would appreciate receiving additional
information, especially laboratory results, as additional reports
become available.

A map showing the location of Midnapore, the district headquarters of
Paschim Medinipur district of West Bengal state can be accessed at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Midnapore. - Mod.TY]

[West Bengal can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive
map of India at http://healthmap.org/r/1pFe. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
Undiagnosed febrile illness - India:(WB) 20110730.2297
.................................................sb/lm/ty/mj/dk
</body>
