<header id=041561>
Published Date: 2011-12-20 15:54:38 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Norovirus - UK: hospital ward closures
Archive Number: 20111220.3644
</header>
<body id=041561>
NOROVIRUS - UK: HOSPITAL WARD CLOSURES
**************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 19 Dec 2011
Source: The Telegraph [edited]
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/healthnews/8964276/Norovirus-outbreak-at-35-hospitals-closes-dozens-of-wards.html


The winter diarrhoea and vomiting bug has affected 35 hospitals, with
hundreds of beds unavailable after 27 wards were shut in the past 2
weeks to isolate infected patients and to deep clean. Overall
confirmed individual cases across the country from July to
mid-December 2011 are 19 per cent higher than during the same period
last year [2010].

Norovirus is extremely contagious and can be lethal to the elderly,
very young or very sick patients. People who have been ill are being
asked not to visit friends and relatives in hospital until they are
well. Maurice Madeo, Deputy Director of Infection Prevention and
Control at Doncaster Royal Infirmary, where wards were closed to new
admissions, urged visitors to wash their hands thoroughly. He said:
"We can't be too careful about limiting the spread of all infections.
An infection on top of another medical condition can prove fatal to
sick, frail patients. So we all need to be mindful of the need for
best practice in personal hygiene."

Nationally, data from the Health Protection Agency released last week
shows that norovirus rates remain below the level expected for this
time of year, possibly reflecting the mild weather until now. The HPA
declares the norovirus season has started when 4.8 per cent of calls
to NHS Direct [telephone service] are about vomiting. Last week, there
were 4.2 per cent of calls about vomiting.

The data showed that last week the North East and South West were the
worst affected. Three hospitals reported that 124 beds are unavailable
as a result of the ward closures. It is thought that the true number
across all 8 hospitals will be more than 200.

Over the weekend, wards were closed to new patients at Montagu
Hospital in South Yorkshire, while 82 beds were closed on 2 wards at
Northwick Park in Harrow, north London. Croydon Health Services said
it had one ward closed to new admissions. Two wards were also closed
at Warwick Hospital, and the Richard Wells Ward was shut at Bedford
hospital to contain a bout of gastroenteritis. Director of nursing and
patient services at Bedford hospital, Eiri Jones, warned visitors not
to sit on hospital beds and not to visit at all if they had been ill
in the preceding 72 hours. "Norovirus is extremely contagious and is
easily passed through person-to-person contact, unwashed hands,
touching surfaces, and through virus particles carried in the air."

The 1st sign of norovirus is usually a sudden sick feeling followed by
forceful vomiting and watery diarrhoea. Queens Hospital in Burton had
one ward temporarily closed after a number of cases of diarrhoea and
vomiting, while the Countess of Chester Hospital had visiting
restrictions in place at 4 wards to contain the outbreak. A 14-bed
ward at the University Hospital Southampton Trust was closed, and
County Durham and Darlington said it had seen isolated cases but had
not had to close any wards. Visitors to Northern Devon hospitals were
warned that only close relatives should visit patients, and Mid Essex
Hospital Trust said it had closed wards last weekend because of a
similar outbreak.

The Royal College of GPs says the virus has not been a major problem
so far this year [2011], although outbreaks can occur very quickly, as
the complaint is extremely infectious. A statement from the Health
Protection Agency said: "Norovirus is highly contagious and can be
transmitted by contact with an infected person; by consuming
contaminated food or water; or by contact with contaminated surfaces
or objects. The virus spreads rapidly in closed environments such as
hospitals, schools, nursing and residential homes. "Anyone who thinks
they may have norovirus should not to go to their doctor's surgery or
A&E, as this could spread the illness to vulnerable people and health
care workers."

[Byline: Rebecca Smith, Donna Bowater and Nick Collins]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[In recent years, ProMED-mail has not reported norovirus outbreaks in
view of their sudden onset and rapid resolution. This press report is
posted as a reminder that the "winter-vomiting bug" season is upon us,
the eminence of which is reflected in the current acceleration of
hospital ward closures.

Norovirus (the winter-vomiting bug) is the most common stomach bug in
the UK, affecting people of all ages. Between 600 000 and one million
people in the UK catch norovirus every year. About 1/4th of outbreaks
are a consequence of food-borne infection. Although outbreaks occur
throughout the year, they are more common in the winter months. There
is no specific treatment for norovirus infection. Fortunately, the
disease is self-limited, and simple supportive measures are sufficient
to care for most people unless they become dehydrated. Norovirus
infection can be unpleasant to experience, but it is not generally
dangerous, and most people make a full recovery within a couple of
days without having to see a doctor. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Norovirus, strain characterization 20110714.2134
.................................................mhj/cp/msp/lm
</body>
