<header id=048081>
Published Date: 2011-08-18 14:21:52 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Influenza (48): ACIP recommendations
Archive Number: 20110818.2510
</header>
<body id=048081>
INFLUENZA (48): ACIP RECOMMENDATIONS
************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 18 Aug 2011
Source: MMWR Early Release, 18 Aug 2011 / 60(Early Release);1-6
[summarized, edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm60e0818a1.htm?s_cid=mm60e0818a1_e&source=govdelivery


[Extracts from the Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2011. Interested readers should consult
the full text via the source URL to view the full text, the tabulated
data and the the references cited. - Mod.CP]

Vaccine Strains for the 2011--12 Influenza Season
-------------------------------------------------
The 2011--12 U.S. seasonal influenza vaccine virus strains are
identical to those contained in the 2010--11 vaccine. These include A/
California/7/2009 (H1N1)-like, A/Perth/16/2009 (H3N2)-like, and B/
Brisbane/60/2008-like antigens. The influenza A (H1N1) vaccine virus
strain is derived from a 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus (3).

Recommendations for Vaccination
-------------------------------
Routine annual influenza vaccination is recommended for all persons
aged equal to or greater than 6 months (1). To permit time for
production of protective antibody levels (4,5), vaccination should
optimally occur before onset of influenza activity in the community,
and providers should offer vaccination as soon as vaccine is
available. Vaccination also should continue to be offered throughout
the influenza season.

Although influenza vaccine strains for the 2011--12 season are
unchanged from those of 2010--11, annual vaccination is recommended
even for those who received the vaccine for the previous season.
Although in one study of children vaccinated against A/Hong Kong/68
(H3N2) virus, vaccine efficacy remained high against this strain 3
years later, the estimated efficacy of vaccine decreased over the
seasons studied (6). Moreover, several studies have demonstrated that
postvaccination antibody titers decline over the course of a year
(7--10). Thus, annual vaccination is recommended for optimal
protection against influenza.

Vaccine Doses for Children Aged 6 Months Through 8 Years
--------------------------------------------------------
Children aged 6 months through 8 years require 2 doses of influenza
vaccine (administered a minimum of 4 weeks apart) during their 1st
season of vaccination to optimize immune response. In a study of
children aged 5 through 8 years who received trivalent inactivated
vaccine (TIV) for the 1st time, the proportion of children with
protective antibody responses was significantly higher after 2 doses
than after 1 dose (11).

The importance of vaccine priming might depend more on the similarity
of the antigenic composition between the priming and 2nd dose than the
temporal interval between doses. From the 2003--04 to 2004--05
influenza seasons, the A(H1N1) virus antigen remained unchanged;
however, the A(H3N2) virus antigen changed to a drifted strain, and
the B virus antigen changed more substantially to a different lineage.
In a study conducted over those 2 seasons, influenza-vaccine naive
children aged 6 through 23 months who received 1 dose of TIV in the
spring of their 1st year of vaccination followed by a 2nd dose in the
fall were less likely to have protective antibody responses to the
A(H3N2) and B virus antigens when compared with children who received
2 doses of identical vaccine in the fall (12). Response to the
unchanged A(H1N1) virus antigen was comparable between the groups. In
another study conducted over the same 2 seasons, unprimed children
aged 10 through 24 months who received one dose of TIV during the fall
of each season had similar responses to the unchanged A(H1N1) virus
antigen as well as to the drifted A(H3N2) virus antigen when compared
with children aged 6 through 24 months who received 2 doses of the
same TIV during the latter season; however, the 1st group had
significantly lower response to the B virus antigen (13). During 2
seasons in which all influenza vaccine virus antigens were identical,
unprimed children aged 6 through 23 months had similar responses when
they received one dose in the spring followed by a second dose in the
fall, as compared with 2 doses received one month apart in the fall
(14). Studies of inactivated monovalent pandemic 2009 (H1N1) vaccine
in children aged <9 years also have demonstrated improved response to
this antigen when 2 doses are administered (15--17).

Available Vaccine Products and Indications
------------------------------------------
Multiple influenza vaccines are expected to be available during the
2011--12 season [Table - not shown here]). All contain the same
antigenic composition. Package inserts should be consulted for
information regarding additional components of various vaccine
formulations.

TIV preparations, with the exception of Fluzone Intradermal (Sanofi
Pasteur), should be administered intramuscularly. For adults and older
children, the deltoid is the preferred site. Infants and younger
children should be vaccinated in the anterolateral thigh. Specific
guidance regarding site and needle length can be found in the ACIP's
General Recommendations on Immunization (18).

A new intradermally administered TIV preparation, Fluzone Intradermal,
was licensed in May 2011. This vaccine is indicated for persons aged
18 through 64 years and contains less antigen than intramuscular TIV
preparations (9 mug rather than 15 mug of each strain per dose) in a
smaller volume (0.1mL rather than 0.5 mL). The vaccine is administered
intradermally via a single-dose, prefilled microinjection syringe. The
preferred site for administration is over the deltoid muscle (19). The
most common adverse reactions include injection-site erythema,
induration, swelling, pain, and pruritus. With the exception of pain,
these reactions occurred more frequently than with intramuscular
vaccine, but generally resolved within 3--7 days. This vaccine is an
alternative to other TIV preparations for those in the indicated age
range, with no preferential recommendation.

As during the 2010--11 season, a vaccine containing 60 mug of
hemagglutinin per vaccine strain (rather than 15mug per strain as in
other intramuscular TIV preparations), Fluzone High-Dose (Sanofi
Pasteur), is available as an alternative TIV for persons aged equal to
or greater than 65 years. No preference is indicated for this TIV
versus other TIV preparations (1).

The intranasally administered live attenuated influenza vaccine
(LAIV), FluMist (MedImmune) is indicated for healthy, nonpregnant
persons aged 2 through 49 years. Within the indicated groups specified
for each vaccine in the package inserts, no preference is indicated
for LAIV versus TIV (1).

Vaccination of Persons Reporting Allergy to Eggs
------------------------------------------------
Allergy to eggs must be distinguished from allergy to influenza
vaccine. Severe allergic and anaphylactic reactions can occur in
response to a number of influenza vaccine components, but such
reactions are rare. A review of reports to the Vaccine Adverse Events
Reporting System (VAERS) of adverse events in adults noted 4 reports
of death caused by anaphylaxis following influenza vaccine during
1990--2005; the vaccine components potentially responsible for these
reactions were not reported (20). A prior severe allergic reaction to
influenza vaccine, regardless of the component suspected to be
responsible for the reaction, is a contraindication to receipt of
influenza vaccine.

All currently available influenza vaccines are prepared by inoculation
of virus into chicken eggs. Hypersensitivity to eggs has been listed
as a contraindication to receipt of influenza vaccine on most package
inserts. However, several recent studies have documented safe receipt
of TIV in persons with egg allergy (21--29), and recent revisions of
some TIV package inserts note that only a severe allergic reaction
(e.g., anaphylaxis) to egg protein is a contraindication. In general,
these studies include relatively fewer persons reporting a history of
anaphylactic reaction to egg, compared with less severe reactions.
Several documents providing guidance on use of influenza vaccine in
persons with egg allergy have been published recently (30--32).

All vaccines should be administered in settings in which personnel and
equipment for rapid recognition and treatment of anaphylaxis are
available. ACIP recommends that all vaccination providers be familiar
with the office emergency plan (18).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>
See Also
Influenza (47): ECDC report, virus characterization 20110816.2477
Influenza (46): Australia (QL) 20110815.2472
Influenza (44): WHO update 20110716.2155
.................................................cp/ejp/mpp
</body>
