<header id=008346>
Published Date: 2011-07-25 12:29:55 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Japanese encephalitis & other - India (06): (AS)
Archive Number: 20110725.2245
</header>
<body id=008346>
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (06): (ASSAM)
*****************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sun 24 Jul 2011
Source: The Assam Tribune [edited]
http://www.assamtribune.com/scripts/detailsnew.asp?id=jul2511/at08


Even though encephalitis (Japanese encephalitis (JE)) has taken a
heavy toll and affected 20 out of the 27 districts of the state, the
State Health Department has claimed that due to the measures it has
taken to prevent spread of the disease, it has remained under control,
or else, the disease would have claimed more lives, claimed sources in
the Health Department. However, sources in the National Vector-borne
Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP) of the Central Government contest
the above claim of the State Health Department as not true.

Sources in the Health Department told this newspaper the department
has taken steps like distribution of long lasting insecticidal nets in
high risk areas and conducting awareness programmes against
vector-borne diseases all over the state. These awareness programmes
have been undertaken generally on malaria and particularly on JE in
the high-risk areas of the disease.

Around 35 lakh [3.5 million] long lasting insecticidal nets were
distributed by the department in 2010 and 2011. Spraying of DDT also
continued in the state between 15 Feb [2011] till July 2011, and
fogging has also been done at places, said the Health Department
sources.

In the meantime, children in the age group of 1-15 have been
vaccinated against Japanese encephalitis infection in the 11 districts
of Dibrugarh, Sivasagar, Golaghat, Jorhat, Tinsukia, Dhemaji,
Sonitpur, Lakhimpur, Kamrup, Nagaon and Udalguri. Routine immunization
of the children who were below one year of age during the vaccination
campaign in these 11 districts has also been done, sources said. The
vaccination programme is conducted by the Assam government with
support from the Union Health Ministry's Immunisation Wing, said the
sources. This time, the state government has projected 5 more
districts for vaccination during the current year. These districts
include Morigaon, Darrang, Nalbari, Barpeta and Goalpara, said the
sources.

Since the adults are becoming vulnerable to Japanese encephalitis
[virus] infection, the government of Assam is now considering an
immunisation programme for the adults on priority basis, according to
the number of JE cases found in the districts. It is expected that by
September next [2011?], vaccination of adults against JE infection
could be started.

The sovernment of Assam has set up 8 laboratories to diagnose JE
infection at the Assam Medical College, Jorhat Medical College,
Gauhati Medical College, Lakhimpur Civil Hospital, Sivasagar Civil
Hospital, Golaghat Civil Hospital, Tezpur Mission Hospital and at the
Dibrugarh Lahowal-based Regional Medical Research Centre, sources
said. Better facilities for diagnosing JE [virus] infection and better
treatment facilities for the patients suffering from JE infection have
been providing scope for better planning to control the disease, and
the detection of so many cases is the result of all such facilities,
said the sources.

--
Communicated by:
HealthMap Alerts via ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The JE virus transmission season in Assam is well underway. The
vaccination campaign should prove helpful in preventing additional
cases. Interestingly, there is no mention made of non-JE encephalitis
cases categorized as "acute encephalitis syndrome" of unknown
etiology, as had been reported last year (2010) and again recently in
Uttar Pradesh state.

It is not clear whether DDT is being applied only in houses for
malaria control in Assam or more widely for control of JE virus
vectors. The application of DDT for mosquito control illustrates the
dilemma that public health authorities face. Use of DDT for control of
the _Culex_ mosquitoes that are the JE virus vectors would requite its
application over large areas where they breed. Because DDT and its
breakdown products are very stable compounds that bioaccumulate in
organisms in natural food chains, its use has been banned in many
countries due to the adverse ecological effects it causes. Landscape
application is not _Culex_ target-specific and will reduce populations
of other insects, including beneficial ones. There is also the risk
that DDT is no longer as effective for control if the target mosquito
populations have become resistant to it.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of India showing the location
of Assam state can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/00J-. -
Mod.TY]
See Also
Japanese encephalitis & other - India (05): (UP) 20110725.2239
Japanese encephalitis & other - India (04): (AS) 20110721.2202
Japanese encephalitis & other - India (03): (UP) 20110719.2184
Japanese encephalitis & other - India (02): (AS) 20110715.2145
Japanese encephalitis & other - India: (UP) 20110707.2055
.................................................ty/msp/dk
</body>
