<header id=016473>
Published Date: 2011-08-14 14:11:08 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Lumpy skin disease, bovine, 2009 - Oman: susp, vaccine
Archive Number: 20110814.2463
</header>
<body id=016473>
LUMPY SKIN DISEASE, BOVINE, 2009 - OMAN: SUSPECTED, VACCINE
***********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 29 Jun 2011 (date of publication)
Source: Asian Journal of Animal and Veterinary advances 2011; l6(8):
851-9 [extracted, summarized, edited]
http://scialert.net/fulltext/?doi=ajava.2011.851.859&org=10


An outbreak of lumpy skin disease in a Holstein dairy herd in Oman:
clinical report
------------------------------------------------------------------
[This paper was received by the journal on 7 Apr 2011, accepted on 26
May 2011, and published on 29 Jun 2011. We copy herewith the abstract
and the case description sections. - Mod.AS]

Abstract
--------
Lumpy skin disease (LSD) is an acute infectious disease of cattle with
significant economic importance and is endemic in the Middle East and
Africa. This clinical report is aimed to register an LSD outbreak that
occurred in 2009 in Oman in a farm population of 3200 Holstein
animals. This manuscript will be the 1st to report LSD occurrence in a
multi-thousand Holstein cattle population. In contrast to the field
outbreaks, this farm LSD incidence had a high mortality of the adult
herd (12 per cent). Herd milk production dropped by 40-65 per cent,
and production loss continued for a few months. Control measures
against LSD, like eradication of both affected population and contact
population and control of vectors, were not feasible with this herd
outbreak. Vaccination was conducted in the wake of the outbreak and
yielded poorer results [see commentary on vaccine used. - Mod.AS].
Treatment outcome of the affected animals was poor, and recovery was
typically complicated by higher ambient temperatures. The source of
the vectors of this catastrophic episode remains inconclusive. In
conclusion, the manuscript emphasizes the need for further
epidemiological and entomological studies at a national level in
Oman.

Case description
----------------
The Holstein herd is located in the Batinah region of Northern Oman
and was operating with a total herd strength of 3200 animals with a
subset of 1250 milking cows. The farm has been functioning for nearly
3 decades and more than a decade as a closed herd. The farm operates
under an intensive management system -- 3X milking, AI breeding -- and
had not succumbed to any other disease outbreak previously. The
animals are housed in 33 corrals with corral cooling systems of a
fog/line sprinkler along with fans.

An independent [?] cow was observed with severe lumpy/urticaria-like
lesions all over the skin in the early morning of 2 May 2009. Upon
immediate screening, in an hour, 8 more cows were detected with
similar signs, and all were isolated. Herd checks and isolation
continued the next day; 40 more cows were suspected to be infected
with LSD. The management was notified about this sudden catastrophe
and briefed on the consequences. Whole herd vaccination was conducted
with KGSP 0/240 102.5 TCID 50-Kenya VacR, 1 mL/dose, subcutaneously on
the 3rd day of the outbreak. Clinical features were characteristic
lumps all over the skin, persistent high pyrexia (40-41.5 C) and
profound depression. Affected animals were observed with increased
salivation, nasal discharge, lacrimation, anorexia, and they were
reluctant to move. The nodules were concentrated at the neck along
with pre scapular lymphadenopathy. The disease continued to spread
among all groups within the herd, including the young replacement
stock.

The majority of the affected population was observed with variable
degrees of lameness accompanied by edema of the limbs. Affected cows
were noted with kerato-conjunctivitis and corneal opacity. As the
disease progressed, the nodules became raw ulcers on the mucous
membranes that coalesced to form a deep ulcer with severe necrosis and
eventually forming a typical sit-fast. Extensive generalization of the
disease was observed in most of the affected cows. They became
severely lame, recumbent in the terminal stages and were observed with
severe tendosynovitis of the limbs. The whole disease episode lasted
for 5-6 weeks from the start of May 2009. Morbidity of LSD in the herd
was 30-35 per cent, and mortality of the adult herd was 12 per cent.
Within 2 months, the total adult herd loss was 259, including the
adult replacement heifers, signifying the loss of future production
stock.

Upon necropsy, several ulcerative pox type lesions were noted in the
upper gastrointestinal and respiratory tract. A total of 13 abortions
occurred as a direct loss of pregnancy. Recovering cows were noted
with varying degrees of skin lesions, such as deep ulcers, agalactia,
emaciation, lameness and recumbency.

Recovery of the affected herd was typically complicated by the
prevailing higher ambient temperatures. The average temperature
humidity indexes (THI's) were 90 and above during the summer months of
June, July and August 2009. Another 125 animals died between July and
August 2009 due to pronounced loss of body condition and recumbency.

[Based upon the mentioned clinical signs], a clinical diagnosis was
made. The scale of the disease spread and characteristic clinical
signs of LSD ruled out the possibility of other etiological
involvement in the herd.

The clinical diagnosis of LSD concurs with other cited works in which
making a field level presumptive clinical diagnosis was given due
priority at the initial stages of the emergence of an outbreak. A
confirmatory laboratory diagnosis for this incident was not
undertaken, as all efforts were directed toward an effective clinical
management. However, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and fluorescent
antibody test (FAT) are the most widely employed and reliable tests in
LSD diagnosis.

[byline: Somasundaram Mathan Kumar]

--
communicated by:
Shamsudeen Fagbo <oloungbo@yahoo.com>

[This paper includes 9 pictures of clinical cases; the photographed
changes are indeed suggestive of LSD, but in the absence of laboratory
confirmation, the case remains considered as "suspected". The disease
signs, number of cases, and their severity could have been influenced
by the vaccination of the whole herd with the Kenyan "sheep and goat
poxvirus" 0240 strain (KS-1) 3 days after the discovery of 1st
suspected case. Unfortunately, no laboratory test was applied in the
1st case(s), so it is not possible now to confirm whether those were
indeed genuine LSD cases (for the differential diagnosis of LSD, see
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/lumpy_skin_disease.pdf).
This vaccine, including a strain isolated from sheep/goats in Kenya,
has been known to be useful in the vaccination of _Ox indicus_ cattle
against LSD; its use in _Ox Taurus_ cattle is rather disputable. It
has been shown to be, in fact, an LSD virus strain (ref 1).

In November 1992, several bovines of the Israeli-Holstein breed
presented clinical signs resembling LSD in the Gaza strip (at that
time controlled by Israel). Further investigations led to the
suspicion that the said signs reflected reactions to the use of the
KGSP 0/240 vaccine (live attenuated strain 0240) in the said animals.
The suspicion was confirmed by observations in Israeli dairy farms in
the vicinity of the Gaza strip. The use of the said vaccine in cattle
was discontinued, the event reported to the OIE (ref 2), and later
published in a scientific paper (ref 3); its abstract follows:

"Capripox vaccine (strain 0240) caused severe generalised skin
reactions in vaccinated dairy cattle in 2 herds, whereas beef cattle
did not develop reactions. All the reacting animals developed lumpy
skin disease-like lesions. The incidence of skin lesions in
first-lactation cows in herd A was 22.9 per cent and in herd B 29.3
per cent, mainly in the post-calving period. In older cows, the
incidence was 10 per cent in herd A and 12.4 per cent in herd B. In
herd B, the high-yielding lactating cows were the most severely
affected. There was a decrease of 3.5 per cent in milk production in
each herd over a period of 12 days, and 6 first-calving animals (3.5
per cent) and 6 cows (1.5 per cent) were slaughtered. A capripox virus
was isolated from the animals with severe lesions, and was also
demonstrated by electron microscopy. The histopathological lesions
were similar to those of lumpy skin disease. The extent of the lesions
appeared to be stress-related and, to a lesser degree, correlated with
age and breed."

Later molecular studies and additional data were discussed (ref 4).

References:
1. Kitching RP, Bhat PP, Black DN. The characterization of African
strains of capripoxvirus. Epidemiol. Infect. 1989; 102: 335-43.
2. World Animal Health in 1993, OIE; Israel and the Controlled
Territories, pages 124-131. Article 5 "Lumpy skin disease" in "List A
diseases." Available online at
http://www.oie.int/doc/ged/D7840.PDF.
3. Yeruham I, Perl S, Nyska A, Abraham A, Davidson M, Haymovitch M,
Zamir O, et al. Adverse reactions in cattle to a capripox vaccine. Vet
Rec. 1994; 135: 330-2.
4. Tulman ER, Afonso CL, Lu Z, et al. The genomes of sheeppox and
goatpox viruses. J Virol. 2002; 76(12): 6054-61.

According to OIE's Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccine for
Terrestrial Animals 2011, "Lumpy skin disease occurs in most African
countries. The most recent outbreaks outside Africa occurred in the
Middle East in 2006 and 2007 and in Mauritius in 2008." - Mod.AS]
See Also
2010
---
Lumpy skin disease, bovine - Uganda: east, susp. RFI 20100822.2938
Lumpy skin disease, bovine - Zimbabwe: (MW) 20100305.0724
2009
---
Lumpy skin disease, bovine - Namibia (02): (northern) OIE 20090420.1489
2007
---
Lumpy skin disease, bovine - Israel: OIE 20070613.1936
2006
---
Lumpy skin disease, bovine - Israel: OIE 20060627.1786
Lumpy skin disease, bovine - Egypt: OIE 20060421.1167
.................................................arn/msp/sh
</body>
