<header id=051878>
Published Date: 2011-12-24 09:37:15 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Cronobacter sakazakii, infant formula, fatal - USA: (MO, IL) recall
Archive Number: 20111224.3670
</header>
<body id=051878>
CRONOBACTER SAKAZAKII, INFANT FORMULA, FATAL - USA: (MISSOURI,
ILLINOIS) RECALL
*******************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Thu 22 Dec 2011
Source: New York Times [edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/23/business/walmart-removes-enfamil-formula-after-boy-dies.html


Two major retail chains, including Walmart, have removed certain
packages of Enfamil, a popular brand of infant formula, from thousands
of stores after a Missouri infant [of Lebanon, Mo.] who consumed the
product died [on Sunday Dec 18] from a rare bacterial infection. The
action by Walmart and Supervalu, which owns supermarket chains like
Acme and Jewel, was highly unusual because there had been no
determination by authorities that the formula was to blame for the
child’s death, and neither the manufacturer nor federal officials
had sought a recall.

The Food and Drug Administration said it was testing samples of the
formula, Enfamil Premium Newborn powder, that it had obtained from the
family of the dead child, Avery Cornett. Officials asserted that there
was no immediate indication that the formula had been contaminated.

A Walmart spokeswoman said the company learned on Sunday night of the
baby’s death and that his parents had fed him formula bought at the
chain’s store in Lebanon, Mo. On Monday, the company decided to pull
all containers of the formula that had come from the same
manufacturing lot from the shelves of its stores. Walmart identified
the product consumed by the baby who died as Enfamil Premium Newborn
powdered infant formula in a 12.5-ounce container, with the lot number
ZP1K7G printed on the bottom of the canister.

The baby boy, who was 10 days old when he died on Sunday, was infected
with _Cronobacter sakazakii_, a bacterium that is commonly found in
the environment and has occasionally been known to cause severe
illness in infants. The company [Mead Johnson] said that it had tested
all of its formula for _Cronobacter_. It said that its records showed
that the batch bought by the Missouri infant’s family had been
tested before it was distributed and that no _Cronobacter_ had been
found.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that it received
reports of about four to six _Cronobacter_ infections in infants a
year. The fatality rate is 40 percent. Scientific studies and disease
investigations have found _Cronobacter_ in various types of formula.
In some cases, when the bacterium was found in open containers, it was
not clear whether the formula had become contaminated after opening.
But in other instances, the bacterium has been found in sealed
packages delivered from the factory. In one case in 2001, an infant
died from _Cronobacter_ [infection] in Tennessee, and investigators
found a genetically indistinguishable strain of the bacterium in
sealed containers of the formula, according to reports by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention and the F.D.A. The formula, a Mead
Johnson product called Portagen, was recalled.

Health officials said it was important for parents to take precautions
when preparing formula. That includes washing hands thoroughly,
sterilizing bottles and other feeding equipment and preparing only
enough formula for a single feeding. Officials said the bacterium
could grow over time if it was in the formula, and holding onto mixed
formula for more than one feeding could increase the chance of
infection.

Walmart said customers who bought Enfamil from the same lot could
bring it back and receive a refund or another product in its place.
Supervalu said Thursday that it had also received formula from the
same lot and was removing it from store shelves. Michael A. Siemienas,
a Supervalu spokesman, said the formula might have been shipped to
hundreds of its stores around the country, including Jewel, Shaws,
Shop and Save, Acme, Farm Fresh, Shoppers and some Albertsons
supermarkets.

[Byline: William Neuman ]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 23 Dec 2011
Source: KMA 960 [edited]
http://www.kma960.com/worldnews.asp


Four more major retailers are following Walmart's example by removing
cans of infant formula from their shelves in light of the death of a
10-day-old Missouri infant from what early tests indicate was a
bacterial infection. Supervalu Inc., Walgreen Co., Kroger Co. and
Safeway have decided to clear their shelves of 12.5 ounce cans of
Enfamil Premium Newborn formula, lot number ZP1K7G. The batch has come
under scrutiny after the infant had allegedly consumed the formula
before he became sick.

Preliminary tests show he developed a rare infection from _Cronobacter
sakazakii_, a bacteria that has previously been found in powdered
infant formula. Thus far, health officials have not confirmed that the
formula in question was the source of the baby's infection.

SuperValu spokesman Mike Siemienas said that while the company did not
yet have exact figures, he expects that "hundreds of stores" will be
affected, and that the formula was removed from shelves as a
precautionary measure. Among Supervalu's subsidiary grocery retailers
that removed the product from shelves are Shaw's, Shop 'n Save,
Jewel-Osco, Acme supermarkets, Farm Fresh, and Albertson's in southern
California.

Walgreen Co. spokesman Jim Cohn confirmed that the company's stores
have pulled the formula from store shelves, though he said it was
unclear how many stores would be affected under the directive. "

The FDA said so far, they "don't have anything that indicates this is
linked to Enfamil." However, the agency is testing samples from the
open packet of formula fed to the infant, an unopened packet of the
formula and the water used to mix the formula. They expect results by
the middle of next week.

The 10-day-old is the second infant to develop a _Cronobacter
sakazakii_-related infection in a Missouri hospital in the past month,
the department said on its web site. The second infant recovered.

A spokesman for Mead Johnson Nutrition, the manufacturer of Enfamil
formulas, said that the company routinely tests its formula for
_Cronobacter_. _Cronobacter sakazakii_, once known as _Enterobacter
sakazakii_, is a bacteria found in powdered infant formula as well as
in plant material and the environment, according to CDC.
Newborns are at highest risk for serious illness from the bacteria,
which can cause meningitis and bloodstream infections. The fatality
rate in infants is very high.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Thu 22 Dec 2011
Source: CBS Chicago.com [edited]
http://chicago.cbslocal.com/2011/12/22/infant-dead-another-sickened-from-bacteria-associated-with-feeding-formulas/


Illinois public health officials are warning parents and other
caregivers to follow safety guidelines when preparing powdered infant
feeding formula after a newborn infant in Missouri died and while an
infant in Illinois remains hospitalized with an infection.

The two infants contracted the bacterial infection _Cronobacter
sakazakii_, which is associated with powdered infant feeding formulas,
a release from the Illinois Department of Public Health said.

Officials are reminding the public to properly prepare the formula by
boiling the water used to mix the formula to sterilize it. The
department warns that commercial powdered infant formulas are not
sterile. It can become contaminated with the bacteria through the raw
products used to make the formula, contamination after pasteurization
or during preparation of reconstituted formula for infant feeding, the
release said. IDPH recommends washing hands, forearms and fingernails
thoroughly before handling any feeding materials or preparing formula
and washing all bottles, nipples, caps and rings with hot, soapy water
and thoroughly rinsing, the release said.

Formula should be kept dry in an airtight container with a firm cap or
lid and stored in a cool, dark area. Make sure the expiration date has
not passed. Water should also be brought to a bubbling boil for two
minutes and allowed to cool before mixing. The department says a
microwave oven should not be used to warm the formula.
More information in best practices in preparing infant formula can be
found on the department’s website
(http://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=32190).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[4]
Date: Fri 23 Dec 2011
Source: 10news.com [edited]
http://www.10news.com/news/30066815/detail.html?treets=3Dsand&tml=3Dsand_8p=


Health officials will be comparing samples to determine if two newborn
infants were infected with the same strain of the bacteria that led to
the rare infections that killed one and sickened another in the past
month.

One newborn in Missouri died from an infection caused by a type of
bacteria called _Cronobacter sakazakii_. Another newborn baby was
sickened in Illinois, but is recovering from the infection, according
to the state health departments.

Health officials Friday were gathering information about each newborn,
including what they ate and where they were, in an effort to trace the
sources of the infections. Early indications led authorities to
suspect a link to powdered infant formula. The Centers for Disease
Control and Infection and the states' health departments have been
testing samples of open containers of infant formula, according to the
CDC's Dr. Robert Tauxe, and the Food and Drug Administration has been
testing samples of unopened powdered formula. "So far no formula
samples have yielded _Cronobacter_," according to Tauxe, who is the
CDC's deputy director for the Division of Foodborne, Waterborne and
Environmental Diseases.

Cronobacter infections are very rare, according to the CDC, which says
only four to six cases are reported per year. Some of these infections
have been linked to powdered infant formula in the past, according to
the Illinois Department of Public Health. However, at this time, it
has not been established that infant formula was the source of either
of the latest infections, according to the CDC.

Late Wednesday, Wal-Mart Stores Inc. announced it had pulled from its
outlets nationwide all cans of Enfamil Newborn powdered formula that
matched the size and lot number of the formula used for the baby who
died in Missouri. The retailer said it removed the product "out of an
abundance of caution" until the investigation determines the source of
the infection.

"We really don't have evidence that the two infections are related to
each other," Tauxe told CNN. "Those two cases that occurred this past
month may just be a coincidence." He said CDC labs will compare
samples of the bacteria from both states in an effort to determine if
they came from the same source. Tauxe cautions that these tests can
take a long time -- "up to a month."

_Cronobacter_ can cause life-threatening infections in newborns. It's
fatal in nearly 40% of cases, according to the CDC, and some of those
who survive can be left with severe neurological problems.

Because _Cronobacter_ is not monitored by PulseNet, a national network
of state and local health departments and laboratories that is
coordinated by the CDC (and works with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and the FDA), the CDC has alerted public health officials
to be on the lookout for any other cases, Tauxe said.

While breastfeeding is the healthiest and safest option to feed
newborn infants, it's not always possible for mothers to do so.
Commercially prepared liquid infant formula is generally safe because
it's been canned, Tauxe said, but powdered infant formula is not
completely sterile. The Illinois Health Department says "formula can
become contaminated with _C. sakazakii_ through the raw products used
to make the formula, contamination after pasteurization or during
preparation of reconstituted formula for infant feeding."

There are steps parents can take to reduce infection in newborn
babies:
-- Prepare only a small amount of reconstituted formula for each
feeding so as to reduce the amount of time the formula is held at room
temperature.
-- Do not hold reconstituted formula for longer than two hours without
refrigeration.
-- Throw out any formula left in a bottle after a feeding.
-- Minimize the time reconstituted formula is held in the refrigerator
before it is fed.

[Byline: Miriam Falco]

--
Communicated by:
Denis Green
<legion@q-net.net.au>


[There are apparently 2 cases of _Cronobacter sakazakii_ infection in
infants reported from Missouri in the past month and 1 from Illinois.
The exact relationship of these 3 cases to each other and to powdered
infant formula has yet to be fully determined.

_Cronobacter sakazakii_ is facultative anaerobic gram-negative
bacillus, which belongs to the Enterobacteriaceae family. The organism
has been implicated in neonatal intensive care unit outbreaks of
meningitis, septicemia and necrotizing enterocolitis, particularly in
preterm infants, although infections due to _C. sakazakii_ can occur
in older infants, children and adults.

The association of neonatal infection due to _C. sakazakii_ with the
use of powdered infant formula is not new. ProMED-mail has previously
reported on infection associated with powdered infant formula
contaminated by _C. sakazakii_ (formerly called _Enterobacter
sakazakii_); see ProMED-mail posts Enterobacter sakazakii, infant
formula - Ireland (02): background 20050127.0299 and Enterobacter
sakazakii, infant formula - Ireland: recall 20050126.0277.

The organism has been associated with a number of different kinds of
powdered formulas from many different countries, including the USA
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. _Enterobacter sakazakii_
infections associated with the use of powdered infant formula -
Tennessee, 2001. MMWR 2002;51:297-300). Genotyping has shown that
patient and formula isolates shared the same typing pattern (Clark NC,
Hill BC, O'Hara CM, et al: Epidemiologic typing of _Enterobacter
sakazakii_ in two neonatal nosocomial outbreaks. Diagn Microbiol
Infect Dis 1990;13:467-72). _Cronobacter_ are frequently isolated from
the environment, plant material (wheat, rice, herbs and spices) and
various food products. Ingredients, such as starches from wheat and
rice, can be a source of _Cronobacter_ that have been found to
contaminate powdered infant formula. Because powdered infant formulas
are not necessarily sterile and may contain pathogenic bacteria,
recommendations have been made concerning preparation and handling of
these products (Agostoni C, Axelsson, I, Goulet O, et al. Preparation
and Handling of Powdered Infant Formula: A Commentary by the ESPGHAN
Committee on Nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2004;39:320-22).

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the USA, showing the states of Illinois
and Missouri, can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/r/1zJq. –
Mod.ML]
See Also
2005
----
Enterobacter sakazakii, infant formula - Ireland (02): background 20050127.0299
Enterobacter sakazakii, infant formula - Ireland: recall 20050126.0277
1997
----
Meningitis, E. sakazakii - Scotland (Kilmarnock) 19970314.0567
.................................................sb/ml/lm
</body>
