<header id=046196>
Published Date: 2011-07-01 06:30:19 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Multiple sclerosis, non human primate - USA: (OR) virus susp.
Archive Number: 20110701.1993
</header>
<body id=046196>
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS, NON HUMAN PRIMATE - USA (OREGON): VIRUS SUSPECTED
*********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 28 Jun 2011
Source: Oregon Live [edited]
http://www.oregonlive.com/health/index.ssf/2011/06/monkey_multiple_sclerosis_disc.html


Monkey multiple sclerosis discovered in Oregon suggests virus may
cause human disease
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 1986, an unknown disease began killing monkeys at the Oregon
National Primate Research Center in Hillsboro. Affected animals
developed an unsteady gait and a rapidly advancing paralysis of the
limbs. Caregivers could do nothing to stop the disease and euthanized
most of the helpless animals within a week of symptom onset.

The disease, researchers now report, is the monkey equivalent of
multiple sclerosis. And it appears to be caused by a virus -- adding
support to the possibility that multiple sclerosis in humans can be
triggered by a viral infection. Experts say the discovery could help
expedite the search for more effective treatments. "That's the
ultimate goal," said co-author Scott Wong, a scientist at the primate
center and Oregon Health & Science University's [OHSU] Vaccine and
Gene Therapy Institute.

Since the 1st case appeared at the primate center, 56 monkeys in the
Japanese macaque colony have fallen ill with the neurological disease.
In most years, no more than 4 cases appear in the population of more
than 300 monkeys. In a few cases, the monkeys recovered and lived
normally for many months before relapsing -- a course often seen in
people with multiple sclerosis, or MS.

Wong and colleagues studied brain and spinal cord samples from nearly
all of the monkeys after death. Microscopic examination revealed
damage very similar to that in MS patients, including nerve fibers
stripped of their protective sheath. Brain scans performed on 8 living
monkeys showed scattered patches of dead and damaged nerve cells also
similar to those seen in people with MS.

The researchers isolated a previously unknown virus from a sample of
damaged spinal nerve tissue taken from one animal. DNA analysis showed
that the virus belongs to the herpes family of viruses. Wong's team
developed a sensitive test for the virus and used it to screen samples
from healthy and diseased monkeys. So far, they have detected the
virus in samples of damaged nerve tissue from 6 monkeys that died from
the disorder. The virus has not showed up in healthy samples.

"Whether or not a similar virus might actually cause MS, that's the
big issue," said Dr Dennis Bourdette, a co-author of the study and
director of OHSU's multiple sclerosis center.

Scientists have spent decades trying to find out whether viruses play
a role in triggering multiple sclerosis. So far, the evidence for a
viral cause has fallen short. Still, many researchers suspect that a
viral infection could be one of the factors that drive the immune
system to mount a misdirected attack on the protective sheath around
nerve fibers.

Using the sensitive tests developed by Wong, Bourdette said his team
is preparing to screen samples from people with MS to look for
human-adapted viruses related to the monkey virus. He said the search
shouldn't take longer than 18 months. If such a virus exists -- and it
proves to be a triggering factor in multiple sclerosis -- Bourdette
said researchers could begin developing a preventive vaccine. The
National Institutes of Health funded the research.

Dr Kenneth L Tyler, professor neurology at the University of
Colorado, Denver, who was not involved with the research, said much
work remains to establish the role of viruses in multiple sclerosis.
"It is feasible that something similar in humans is occurring,
although this study does not prove it," Tyler said. He noted that the
researchers have yet to present definitive evidence that the monkey
virus is the cause of the MS-like disease. For instance, he said,
researchers must show that exposing healthy monkeys to the virus will
reliably produce the disease.

But even if the viral connection doesn't pan out, Tyler said the
discovery of the MS-like disease in Japanese macaques is significant
because it gives researchers a better animal model for testing
treatments, because it is a naturally occurring disease -- not a
condition contrived by laboratory manipulation. "This is a very
exciting and interesting animal model," Tyler said.

[Byline: Joe Rojas-Burke]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[One wonders if this syndrome appears in other non-human primates. Is
it the same or perhaps a different virus? While a vaccine would be
great to prevent this nasty malady, a bona fide treatment would return
so many people to a much better life. I wonder if this information
will be used to investigate new/better/curative treatments. - Mod.TG]

[Photo of Japanese macaque (_Macaca fuscata_) & young:
http://animals.nationalgeographic.com/staticfiles/NGS/Shared/StaticFiles/animals/images/800/japanese-macaque.jpg
- Mod.JW]

[The state of Oregon can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map at http://healthmap.org/r/0*BQ Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

.................................................sb/tg/mj/jw
</body>
