<header id=006447>
Published Date: 2011-09-01 13:26:34 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Mumps - Bosnia & Herzegovina: ongoing outbreak
Archive Number: 20110901.2679
</header>
<body id=006447>
MUMPS - BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA: ONGOING OUTBREAK
************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 1 Sep 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance 2011; 16(35) [abridged, edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19959


Ongoing large mumps outbreak in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Dec 2010 to Jul 2011
----------------------------------------------
[abridged from: Hukic M, Ravlija J, Dedeic Ljubovic A, Moro A, Arapcic
S, Muller CP, et al. Ongoing large mumps outbreak in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, December 2010 to July
2011]

Summary
-------
>From December 2010 until the end of July 2011, 5261 mumps cases were
recorded in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, leading to an
incidence of 225.8 per 100 000. 15 to 19 year olds (43 per cent) were
most affected, and 62 per cent of cases were male. Mumps-specific IgM
antibodies were found in about 70 per cent of sera investigated,
complications were reported in 41 per cent of 81 hospitalised
patients. The outbreak affected mainly those unvaccinated or unaware
of their vaccination status and is probably due to vaccination
failures during the war and post-war period (1992-1998).

In December 2010, the cantons of Zenica-Doboj (n=40) and Central
Bosnia (n=34) reported an increased number of mumps cases to the
Ministry of Health of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Subsequently, the number
of mumps patients continued to rise, and more cantons reported cases.
By the end of July 2011, a total of 5261 cases were reported to the
Ministry of Health.

Background
----------
Immunisation against mumps was introduced in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
1980 in the form of a combined vaccine against measles, mumps, and
rubella (MMR) [1]. Until 1992, it was recommended to vaccinate
children between one and 14 years of age without documented history of
mumps with one dose of MMR vaccine. Between 1992 and 1995, the war
caused disruptions to the routine immunisation programme in the
country, and these disruptions continued also during the post-war
period (1996-1998). In 2001, a 2-dose schedule with MMR vaccine was
implemented throughout the country, with the 1st dose given at the age
of 12 months and the 2nd dose at the age of 7 years and no later than
14 years. The MMR vaccine produced by the Institute of Immunology
Zagreb was used until 2009 and contained the L-Zagreb strain as the
component, and since 2010, the Glaxo SmithKline MMR vaccine containing
the Jeryl Lynn strain has been employed [1,2]. The average coverage
with MMR vaccine for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina between
1998 and 2009 ranged from 84-92 per cent for the 1st dose, and from
53-92 per cent for the 2nd dose (figure 1).

Mumps is a notifiable disease in Bosnia and Herzegovina and is
reported on the basis of clinical symptoms and epidemiological data.
Reporting of mumps is normally done by the doctors to the Institute
for Public Health, which looks for epidemic evidence and provides
information to the Ministry of Health.

The 1st reports on mumps in Bosnia and Herzegovina date back to 1956
[3]. In the period before 1980, when vaccination against mumps was
introduced, morbidity was high with an incidence ranging from 189 to
253 cases per 100 000 inhabitants per year (figure 2). After
introduction of the vaccine, incidence decreased from 123 in 1981 to
3.5 in 1992. During the war from 1992 to 1995, the reported incidence
of mumps was between 7.8 and 5.1, but reporting was irregular, and
underreporting is likely. Between 1999 and 2002, 25 smaller outbreaks
were reported with a total of 2743 cases. The last outbreak of mumps
in Bosnia and Herzegovina occurred in 2002 with a total of 410
reported cases, and until December 2010 only few cases were notified
[4].

At the beginning of December 2010, a mumps outbreak started in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and is still currently ongoing.
This report describes the mumps outbreak in the country and includes
data from December 2010 until the end of July 2011.

Description of the outbreak
---------------------------
Since the start of the outbreak in December 2010, 5261 cases have
occurred in 9 of the 10 cantons of the country; however, cantons are
affected to a different extent. In December 2010, 85 cases were
reported, and the peak of the outbreak was in April 2011 with 1240
cases reported (figure 3).

The most severely affected cantons are Central Bosnia Canton (n=2156
cases), Zenica-Doboj Canton (n=1695), Sarajevo Canton (n=1035), and
Herzegovina-Neretva Canton (n=326). Together, they account for about
99 per cent of all cases. Only a few cases have been reported in
Una-Sana, Tuzla, Bosnian Podrinje, West Herzegovina, and West Bosnia
cantons, and no cases from Posavina Canton (figure 4).

For 5219 patients, data on age and sex are available. The majority
(3255/5219; 62 per cent) are male, and the most affected age groups
include the 15 to 19 year olds (2232/5219; 43 per cent), followed by
20 to 29 year olds (1254/5219; 24 per cent) (figure 5).

Patients with serious clinical symptoms such as fever, temperature
above 38.5 C, swelling of the parotid and/or salivary glands, and
fatigue were hospitalised. A total of 81 patients were admitted to the
Clinical Centre University of Sarajevo, but we have no data for other
hospitals. The vast majority were male (67/81, 83 per cent), and 30 of
them had orchitis (30/67, 45 per cent). One female and 2 male patients
had meningitis (3/81, 4 per cent).

Vaccination status of cases
---------------------------
For 34 per cent of the cases (1774/5219) vaccination status was
unknown. About 33 per cent of cases (1722/5219) were unvaccinated, 18
per cent (939/5219) were vaccinated with one dose of a
mumps-containing vaccine, and only 15 per cent (784/5219) had received
2 doses (figure 6).

Laboratory findings
-------------------
Samples were collected for laboratory analysis from 104 cases: throat
swabs from 32, throat swabs and serum from 48, and only serum from 24
of them. The cases' age ranged from 7-48 years (median: 22.15 Â±
7.47), and 83 per cent were male. All 72 serum samples were tested
with the Siemens Enzygnost anti-parotitis virus kit for mumps-specific
IgG and IgM antibodies. 68 samples were IgG positive (94 per cent), 3
were borderline, and one was negative. A total of 50 samples were
positive for IgM (69 per cent), 8 were borderline, and 14 were
negative. The results of PCR and sequence analysis from throat swabs
are pending.

Control measures
----------------
In March 2011, the federal minister of health declared a mumps
epidemic. It was recommended to increase the vaccination coverage with
2 doses of MMR vaccine in children between one and 14 years of age,
and some schools with increased case numbers were temporarily closed.
Other epidemic control measures by public health authorities,
supported by doctors and/or teachers in the schools included: (i)
health education, (ii) disseminating information about general and
personal sanitary and hygienic measures to take, (iii) isolating
infected persons and limiting contact with them, (iv) disinfection of
articles of general use, and (v) frequent hand washing in order to
limit further spread of the disease. The control measures were in
accordance with protocols for prevention and infection control.

Discussion and conclusions
--------------------------
In recent years, mumps outbreaks were reported from many countries all
over the world [5-8]. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, disruption in the
immunisation program during the war (1992-1995) and in the post-war
period (1996-1998) left considerable numbers of children susceptible
to measles, rubella, and mumps [9]. The children, who were supposed to
get their 1st vaccination between 1992 and 1998 are now between 14 and
20 years old and constitute a large proportion of the people affected
by the current outbreak. Our data also show that most cases in the
current outbreak (85 per cent) either did not know their vaccination
status or reported being not or incompletely vaccinated.

The geographical regions with the highest case numbers in the current
mumps outbreak largely concur with the areas that were most severely
affected during previously reported rubella and measles epidemics
[10,11]. Also, during the war from 1992 to 1995, immunisation was not
fully implemented across the entire territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The program of immunisation was not the same across the
Cantons. Two doses of vaccine were used in the Posavina,
Herzegovina-Neretva and West Herzegovina cantons, while in other
cantons, only one dose was implemented. Some small outbreaks occurred
in Una-Sana Canton and Tuzla Canton, and they had additional
vaccination with monovalent parotitis vaccine, and that is the
probable reason for the smaller number of cases in these cantons in
the current outbreak.

Similar to the rubella outbreak in 2010 [10], more males contracted
the disease (62 per cent), and the most severely affected age group
were young adolescents (15 to 19 years of age, 43 per cent). High
numbers of mumps cases in male adolescents were reported recently from
several countries, such as Israel, the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, and the United States [5,12-14].

The majority of cases reported during the current outbreak were
diagnosed based on clinical symptoms, sometimes supported by
epidemiological data. Only a few samples were collected from
non-hospitalised patients for laboratory confirmation, as the clinical
picture was considered typical. In about 70 percent of the serum
samples, mumps-specific IgM antibodies were detected, confirming the
clinical diagnosis.

Information about complications and hospitalisations related to the
outbreak is incomplete. The available data point to complications in
about 7 per cent of the female (meningitis) and 48 per cent of the
male (meningitis and orchitis) hospitalised patients, however, total
numbers of cases are low. Symptomatic meningitis has been reported to
occur in up to 15 per cent of patients and orchitis in as many as 50
per cent of post-pubertal males in other studies [12].

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently facing a large
outbreak of mumps with an incidence of 225.8 in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovna in the 1st half of 2011. The outbreak is
probably related to failures to vaccinate during the war and post-war
period between 1992 and 1998. Monitoring of the immunisation status
and vaccine effectiveness, high vaccination coverage rates with 2
doses, and catch-up campaigns are necessary to avoid measles, mumps,
or rubella outbreaks in the future.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The figures and references have been omitted from this posting, and
interested readers should consult the original document via the source
URL.

Formerly one of the 6 federal units constituting the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina gained its independence
during the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s. A map of Bosnia and Herzegovina
can be accessed at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosnia_and_Herzegovina#Bosnian_War_.281992.E2.80.931995.29.

The level of immunisation achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite
a decline in cases between 2002 and 2010, has not been sufficient to
interrupt the transmission of mumps virus infection. As the triple MMR
vaccine has been in use since 1980, it would be interesting to have
information on the incidence of measles and rubella during the same
period.

The MMR vaccine produced by the Institute of Immunology Zagreb was
used until 2009 and contained the L-Zagreb strain as component, and
since 2010, the Glaxo SmithKline MMR vaccine containing the Jeryl Lynn
strain has been employed. Was there a reason for this? - Mod.CP]
See Also
Mumps - Czech Republic (02): background 20110823.2569
Mumps - Bermuda 20110823.2568
Mumps - Czech Republic: (SK) supplementary vaccination? 20110822.2553
Mumps - Canada (05): (ON) 20110817.2492
Mumps - UK (03): (England) university students 20110506.1403
Mumps - Canada: (BC) 20110415.1188
Mumps, supermarket - UK: England, susp. 20110413.1166
Mumps - UK (02): (Scotland) young people 20110224.0612
Mumps - UK: (Scotland) young people 20110115.0169
.................................................cp/msp/sh
</body>
