<header id=019548>
Published Date: 2011-09-21 16:57:17 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (07): (MI)
Archive Number: 20110921.2870
</header>
<body id=019548>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (07): (MICHIGAN)
*************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 20 Sep 2011
Source: Michigan Department of Natural Resources [edited]
http://www.michigan.gov/dnr/0,4570,7-153-10371_10402-262658--,00.html


The Department of Natural Resources today [20 Sep 2011] announced a
diagnosis of epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD), an often-fatal viral
disease found in wild ruminants, in 2 white-tailed deer in Cass
County.

Two deer, a 1.5-year-old male and a 3.5-year-old female recently
collected from a location in the county, have tested positive for the
disease at the Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health at
Michigan State University.

The disease is characterized by extensive hemorrhages and is
transmitted by a biting fly (midge). White-tailed deer develop signs
of the illness about 7 days after exposure. A constant characteristic
of the disease is its sudden onset. Deer initially lose their appetite
and fear of humans, grow progressively weaker, salivate excessively,
develop a rapid pulse and respiration rate and finally become
unconscious. Due to a high fever, the deer often are found sick or
dead along or in bodies of water.

There is no evidence that humans can contract the EHD virus.

There is no known effective treatment for, or control of, EHD.
Michigan 1st documented EHD in its white-tailed deer population in
1955. Additional die-offs attributed to EHD occurred in 1974 in
several Michigan counties and again in 2006 in Allegan County. A
similar die-off affected areas of Oakland and Macomb counties along
the Clinton River in 2008, in Livingston County in 2009 and in 6
western Michigan counties in 2010. EHD is a common white-tailed deer
disease in the southern United States. More frequent outbreaks of EHD
in Michigan could be a consequence of climate changes that favor the
northward spread of the biting flies that spread the disease, said
Russ Mason, chief of the DNR Wildlife Division.

Property owners who discover dead deer they suspect died of EHD should
call the nearest DNR office to report it. The DNR Wildlife Disease Lab
would like to collect more fresh specimens to test for the disease to
determine its spread. Property owners are responsible for the proper
disposal of unwanted carcasses. Carcasses can be buried at a
sufficient depth so that body parts are not showing. Carcasses also
can be disposed of at landfills that accept household solid waste.

For more information on EHD, please see
http://www.michigan.gov/wildlifedisease.

The Michigan Department of Natural Resources is committed to the
conservation, protection, management, use and enjoyment of the state's
natural and cultural resources for current and future generations. For
more information, go to http://www.michigan.gov/dnr.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[In some locations, this disease seems to be a seasonal disease; in
other locations when the biting midges first appear, we know that EHD
may not be far behind.

For more information about this disease, readers are encouraged to
view the moderator's comments on ProMED-mail post 20110918.2842. -
Mod.TG]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (06): (NJ, PA)
200110918.2842
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (05): (NY) 20110911.2767
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (04): (NJ) 20110911.2762
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (03): (KS,MT) 20110904.2704
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ) 20110826.2601
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
2010
----
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (04): (NJ) 20101022.3823
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (03): (MI) 20101001.3565
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (02): (MT) 20100923.3433
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, bovine - Guadeloupe: OIE 20100904.3175
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA: (IL) 20100819.2880
.................................................sb/tg/msp/dk
</body>
