<header id=016246>
Published Date: 2011-08-28 10:13:08 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> HIV, organ transplantation - Taiwan
Archive Number: 20110828.2640
</header>
<body id=016246>
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS, ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION - TAIWAN
************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Sat 27 Aug 2011
Source: The Taipei Times, Central News Agency (CNA) [edited]
http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2011/08/28/2003511870


Hospital transplants organs of donors infected with HIV
-------------------------------------------------------
The National Taiwan University Hospital transplanted the organs of a
donor infected with HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] on Wednesday
(24 Aug 2011) without realizing it, putting 5 organ transplant
recipients at high risk of contracting AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome], the Department of Health said yesterday (Fri 26 Aug 2011).
The department said it was the first-ever known incident of recipients
being exposed to the risk of contracting AIDS because of organ
transplants.

The hospital informed the Health Department of the incident earlier in
the day, Centers for Disease Control deputy director Shih Wen-yi said.
Shih said the hospital had offered emergency anti-AIDS medication to
the 5 organ transplant recipients. The hospital has not issued a
statement on why the organs were not properly screened before the
transplant or when it actually discovered that the donor had HIV
infection. The Health Department has demanded that the hospital
present a full report on the incident within 3 days.

Shih said the hospital had apologized to the patients and their
families as well as briefing them on the situation. He added that to
the best of his knowledge, the hospital had consistently conducted HIV
testing on organ donors. "We don't know at the moment what went wrong
in this case, which has left 5 innocent organ recipients facing the
risk of contracting AIDS," Shih said.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Sat 27 Aug 2011
Source: Focus Taiwan News Channel, Central News Agency (CNA) report
[edited]
http://focustaiwan.tw/ShowNews/WebNews_Detail.aspx?Type=aLIV&ID=201108270030


Hospital admits mistake in organ transplant procedures
------------------------------------------------------
The National Taiwan University Hospital (NTUH) said on Saturday [27
Aug 2011] that its transplant team did not follow standard operating
procedures and check test results on the computer before transplanting
organs from an HIV-infected donor into 4 patients earlier this week.
NTUH spokesman Tan Ching-ting said at a news conference that its
physicians only checked on results of HIV tests on the organs with the
hospital's lab people by phone, leading to a misunderstanding.

Transplant team members heard a member of the lab say the test results
were "non-reactive" when in fact they were "reactive" and proceeded to
perform 4 transplant procedures, Tang said. A 5th organ was sent to
National Cheng Kung University Hospital in Tainan, which apparently
suffered a similar oversight. Speaking on the same occasion, Hung
Chien-ching, an attending physician in NTHU's infectious disease
department, said the hospital did not know the donor was an HIV
carrier. Local health departments usually do not expose carriers'
identities over privacy protection concerns. "Before our team
performed the transplants, it had no way to know the donor was an HIV
carrier," he said.

Earlier on Saturday [27 Aug 2011], Yao Ke-wu, director of the Bureau
of Health of Hsinchu City, said the donor was a legally listed HIV
carrier in Taipei, who received treatment there until July [2011]
before being referred to Hsinchu City for continued care. The
incident, Yao said, exposed a major loophole in the domestic organ
transplant system.

The Department of Health (DOH) said earlier in the day that NTUH, one
of Taiwan's most prestigious health care institutions, transplanted
the organs of an HIV infected donor on Wednesday [24 Aug 2011] without
realizing it, putting 5 organ transplant recipients at high risk of
contracting AIDS. It marked the 1st time in Taiwan that organ
transplants might lead to recipients falling victim to AIDS, the DOH
said.

The hospital informed the DOH of the incident on Saturday [27 Aug
2011], said Shih Wen-yi, deputy director-general of the DOH's Centers
for Disease Control. According to Shih, the hospital has offered
emergency anti-AIDS medications to the 5 organ transplant recipients.
Yao Ke-wu, director of the Bureau of Health of Hsinchu City, said the
donor was a legally listed HIV carrier in Taipei, who sustained a
serious head injury after accidentally falling from a high-rise
building on Wed 24 Aug 2011. As his condition was not promising, the
37 year old's family took the initiative to contact NTUH to arrange
the transfer of his organs, Yao said. An NTUH transplant team rushed
to the city's Nanmen Hospital to remove the man's organs and brought
them to Taipei for transplant into 5 different patients, Yao said. The
DOH has demanded that NTUH present a complete report on the incident
in 3 days.

Shih said the hospital has apologized to the patients and their
families as well as briefed them on the situation. To the best of his
knowledge, Shih said the hospital has consistently conducted HIV
testing on organ donors. "We don't know at the moment what went wrong
in this case, which has left 5 innocent organ recipients facing AIDS
risks," Shih said.

HIV is a lentivirus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, a
condition in humans in which progressive failure of the immune system
allows life-threatening opportunistic infections and cancers to
thrive.

[byline: Chen Ching-fang, Sofia Wu]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Guidelines for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus through transplantation of human tissue and organs have been
published by the United States' Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention -- MMWR Recommendations and Reports 1994; 43(RR-8); 1-17,
20 May /(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00031670.htm).

The present incident in Taiwan appears to have been an unfortunate
consequence of a failure in communication rather than any technical
insufficiency. The outcome of the current investigation of the
incident is awaited. No doubt lessons will be learned. It remains to
be established in due course whether the emergency anti-AIDS
medications administered to these 5 organ transplant recipients will
be sufficient to prevent the establishment of HIV infection. - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Taiwan can be seen at
http://healthmap.org/r/00tD. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]
See Also
HIV, organ transplantation - USA: (NY) 20110318.0868
2007
---
HIV, organ transplantation - Italy 20070308.0825
.................................................mpp/cp/mj/sh
</body>
