<header id=046758>
Published Date: 2011-06-13 08:44:01 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Antibiotic resistance: Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA (CA) azithromycin
Archive Number: 20110613.1800
</header>
<body id=046758>
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE: NEISSERIA GONORRHOEAE - USA (CALIFORNIA)
AZITHROMYCIN
****************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 13 May 2011
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011; 60(18); 579-81 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6018a2.htm?s_cid=mm6018a2_w


_Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ with reduced susceptibility to azithromycin -
San Diego County, California, 2009
----------------------------------------------------------------------
A single 2 g dose of azithromycin effectively treats genitourinary
infections caused by susceptible _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ and has been
used to treat uncomplicated gonorrhea in persons with cephalosporin
allergy. However, azithromycin is not recommended as monotherapy
because of concern over the emergence of resistance. Instead, a 1 g
dose of azithromycin is recommended as a component of dual therapy for
gonorrhea, in conjunction with a cephalosporin (that is, 250 mg of
ceftriaxone or 400 mg of cefixime, if ceftriaxone is not an option).

During January 1992-July 2009, of 87 566 _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolates
tested for azithromycin susceptibility by CDC's national Gonococcal
Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP), only 39 (0.04 percent) had
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) 8 mcg/mL or greater
(including 25 with 8 mcg/mL and 14 with 16 mcg/mL), indicating reduced
susceptibility; none of the isolates were collected in San Diego
County, California (CDC, unpublished data, 2011). During
August-October 2009, 5 of 55 (9.1 percent) _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolates
obtained from men with symptomatic urethritis tested at San Diego
County's main municipal sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinic had
high azithromycin MICs: 3 with 8 mcg/mL and 2 with 16 mcg/mL. This
report summarizes the laboratory and epidemiologic findings associated
with this reduced susceptibility to azithromycin.

In San Diego County, clinicians treating cephalosporin-allergic
patients with a 2 g dose of azithromycin for uncomplicated gonorrhea
are advised to obtain tests of cure 3 weeks after treatment and to
recommend sexual abstinence until a negative test result for gonorrhea
is achieved. Continued surveillance for antibiotic resistance and
effective control efforts are critical for gonorrhea prevention.

GISP conducts susceptibility testing of urethral _N. gonorrhoeae_
isolates obtained from men with symptomatic urethritis seeking care at
29 US STD clinics, including San Diego County's main municipal STD
clinic. MICs to 8 antibiotics, including azithromycin, are determined
by agar dilution [1]. Additionally, in San Diego County, nucleic acid
amplification tests (NAATs) are used to test for urethral, pharyngeal,
and rectal gonorrhea and chlamydia infections at the county's public
health laboratory. Patients are interviewed and asked to inform their
recent sex partners (that is, preceding 3 months) of their infections
or bring them in for treatment.

Case reports
------------
During August-October 2009, 5 cases of urethral gonorrhea with high
MICs to azithromycin (3 with 8 mcg/mL and 2 with 16 mcg/mL) were
diagnosed by Gram stain and confirmed by NAAT at San Diego County's
main municipal STD clinic. The 5 _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolates with high
MICs (9.1 percent) obtained from the 5 patients were among 55 _N.
gonorrhoeae_ isolates obtained from men with symptomatic urethritis
tested during the 3-month period. All 5 patients were men who have sex
with men (MSM). 4 were human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative by
self-report and one had an HIV-negative test result.

Of the 5 patients 3 were non-Hispanic white men, one was non-Hispanic
black, and one was Hispanic. 4 were San Diego County residents, and
one was a resident of a Midwestern state. Median age was 29 years
(range: 19-31 years). None had traveled internationally within 3
months of receiving their gonorrhea diagnosis. In accordance with CDC
recommendations in effect at the time of diagnosis [2], all 5 were
treated with 125 mg of ceftriaxone for uncomplicated gonorrhea and
were given a 1 g dose of azithromycin for presumptive treatment of
chlamydia infection (subsequently, the recommended dosage for
ceftriaxone was increased to 250 mg [3]).

NAATs revealed concurrent pharyngeal chlamydia and rectal gonorrhea
in one of the 5 men and rectal gonorrhea in another. One man had had
exposure to azithromycin when he had been treated 113 days earlier
with 125 mg of ceftriaxone for gonorrhea and 1 g of azithromycin for
presumptive chlamydia. Isolates from all 5 men were susceptible to
ceftriaxone, cefixime, penicillin, tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, and
cefpodoxime. Of the 5 patients, 3 were treated and did not return to
the clinic, one was treated successfully based on test of cure, and
one was treated, reinfected within 3 months, and retreated
successfully based on test of cure.

The 5 men reported a total of 13 male partners with whom they had had
oral or anal sex (range: 1-4 partners). None of the men named partners
in common. County health workers attempted to contact sex partners to
encourage testing and treatment. 3 of 5 sex partners with known
contact information went to the STD clinic for treatment and testing.
2 had asymptomatic pharyngeal gonorrhea; the 3rd contact did not have
gonorrhea but had rectal chlamydia and newly diagnosed HIV infection.
Of the 2 contacts with pharyngeal gonorrhea, one was treated and did
not return to the clinic. The other contact, who reported penicillin
allergy, was treated with 2 g azithromycin and returned to the clinic
for test of cure, which was positive for pharyngeal gonorrhea. The
patient was desensitized and treated with ceftriaxone under
supervision at a hospital. The patient then declined to return for
test of cure.

Three patients and 2 contacts were available for extended interviews.
4 reported no recreational drug use; one acknowledged using mushrooms
during the preceding 12 months. Venues for meeting sex partners
included a website (one interviewee), a gay nightclub (2), and through
friends (2).

Molecular study results
-----------------------
Typing was performed on the 5 isolates with high MICs to azithromycin
by using _N. gonorrhoeae_ multiantigen sequence typing (NG-MAST), in
which polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based methods are used to
sequence portions of the highly polymorphic outer-membrane genes por
and tbpB [4]. NG-MAST assigns a number to each unique por and tbpB
allele sequence on the basis of identified polymorphisms, and assigns
a sequence type to the isolate on the basis of the combination of
allele numbers.

For the 1st 4 isolates obtained, PCR-based methods also were used to
sequence 2 genes associated with _N. gonorrhoeae_ azithromycin
resistance: the gene encoding the 23S ribosomal (rRNA) subunit [5],
for which 4 alleles per genome exist, and the coding and promoter
regions of the mtrR gene [6], for which one allele per genome exists.

NG-MAST showed one isolate with por allele 1808 and tbpB allele 29,
which is sequence type 2992. 4 isolates had por allele 2577, which
shares more than 99 percent homology with por allele 1808, and tbpB
allele 29; these 4 isolates were assigned a novel sequence type, 4198
[see Table at source URL above]. DNA sequencing analysis of the 23S
rRNA gene revealed the C2611T, a resistance-associated mutation, and
analysis of the mtrR gene revealed the G115A mutation and G131A, a
novel mutation [see Table at source URL above].

Subsequent isolates with high MICs
----------------------------------
During November 2009-December 2010, of 229 new isolates obtained from
MSM who were examined at the STD clinic and tested through GISP, 4
(1.7 percent) had high MICs to azithromycin: 3 with 8 mcg/mL, and one
with 16 mcg/mL. These isolates were not molecularly characterized.
Subsequently, in February and September 2010, San Diego County alerted
local clinicians that _N. gonorrhoeae_ infections with high MICs to
azithromycin had been identified and reminded clinicians to treat
uncomplicated gonorrhea only with recommended agents. Through December
2010, no treatment failures had been reported.

Reported by:
KA Katz, EF Pierce, H Aiem, P Henderson, Health and Human Svcs
Agency, County of San Diego; M Pandori, A Wu, S Buono, San Francisco
Dept of Public Health Laboratory; PM Barry, STD Prevention and Control
Svcs, San Francisco Dept of Public Health; M Samuel, C Kong, STD
Control Br, California Dept of Public Health; P Dixon, Univ of Alabama
Regional Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project Laboratory; G Bolan,
HS Weinstock, EL Yee, RD Kirkcaldy, Div of Sexually Transmitted
Diseases Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis,
STD, and TB Prevention; CB Khaokham, EIS Officer, CDC

MMWR Editorial note
--------------
The 5 _N. gonorrhoeae_ infections with high MICs to azithromycin
identified in MSM during a 3-month period in 2010 in San Diego County
amount to an unusually large cluster. One man had recent exposure to
azithromycin, which might be a risk factor for development of _N.
gonorrhoeae_ azithromycin resistance [7]. The lack of any reported sex
partners in common among the 5 men and the later discovery of 4 new
isolates with high MICs to azithromycin, also in MSM, suggest that
azithromycin-resistant strains might be circulating among MSM in San
Diego County.

In 1999, GISP identified a cluster of _N. gonorrhoeae_ infections
with reduced azithromycin susceptibility (MIC range: 1-4 mcg/mL) among
12 men examined at a Kansas City, Missouri, STD clinic [8]. The 12
said they had not had sex with men; 6 reported contact with a female
commercial sex worker. The high MICs to azithromycin observed in the
San Diego County cluster are consistent with those reported since 2001
from England and Wales [9] and Argentina [10], where strains with MICs
8 mcg/mL to 2048 mcg/mL have been identified. The England and Wales
isolates were recovered from 3 females and 3 males, all heterosexual.
No demographic or behavioral characteristics were available from
Argentina.

NG-MAST findings in San Diego County indicated that the 5 isolates
are associated with 2 closely related _N. gonorrhoeae_ strains.
Sequencing of the 23S rRNA and mtrR coding regions of the 4 sequenced
isolates, which demonstrated identical mutations, further supports the
isolates' relatedness. The 23S rRNA gene encodes a component of the
50S ribosome, where bacterial protein synthesis occurs. The C2611T
mutation produces a 50S ribosome to which macrolides cannot bind,
preventing them from exerting a bacteriostatic effect [4]. The mtrR
gene encodes a repressor of a bacterial efflux pump that exports
antibiotics, including macrolides, out of the bacteria. In the mtrR
gene, deletions in the promoter region, observed in one sequenced
isolate, and missense mutations in the coding region, identified in
all 4 sequenced isolates, can lead to decreased efflux pump
repression, increased export of macrolides, and ultimately, decreased
ability of azithromycin to inhibit bacterial protein synthesis [5].
Although the G115A mutation in the mtrR coding region has been
reported previously [6], the G131A mutation is novel.

The association between azithromycin MICs in _N. gonorrhoeae_ and
treatment outcomes is not well-understood. For surveillance purposes,
GISP defines reduced susceptibility of _N. gonorrhoeae_ to
azithromycin as MICs 2 mcg/mL or greater [1]. CDC does not recommend
azithromycin as monotherapy for routine treatment of gonorrhea because
of concerns regarding emerging resistance. Dual therapy with a
cephalosporin (that is, ceftriaxone or cefixime, if ceftriaxone is not
an option) and either azithromycin or doxycyline is recommended by CDC
for uncomplicated rectal and urogenital gonorrhea; for pharyngeal
gonorrhea, ceftriaxone is the recommended cephalosporin (with either
azithromycin or doxycycline) [3].

The potential for the emergence of cephalosporin and azithromycin
resistance in _N. gonorrhoeae_ poses challenges to clinicians and
public health agencies. Continued surveillance for antibiotic
resistance by using culture and susceptibility testing is essential
for detecting resistance and guiding treatment. Additionally,
development of new diagnostic and treatment strategies and effective
antibiotics will be critical to gonorrhea prevention and control.

References
----------
1. CDC. Gonococcal Isolate Surveillance Project protocol. Atlanta,
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007. Available
at
http://www.cdc.gov/std/gisp/protocol2006_web_version_rev12_2007.pdf.
Accessed 6 May 2011.
2. CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006.
MMWR 2006; 59(No. RR-11). Available at
ahttp://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5511a1.htm.
3. CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010.
MMWR 2010; 59(No. RR-12). Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5912a1.htm.
4. Martin IM, Ison CA, Aanensen DM, et al: Rapid sequence-based
identification of gonococcal transmission clusters in a large
metropolitan area. J Infect Dis 2004; 189(8): 1497-505. [Available at
http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/content/189/8/1497.long].
5. Chisholm SA, Dave J, Ison CA: High-level azithromycin resistance
occurs in _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ as a result of a single point
mutation in the 23S rRNA genes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;
54(9): 3812-6. [Available at
http://aac.asm.org/cgi/content/full/54/9/3812?view=long&pmid=20585125].
6. Warner DM, Shafer WM, Jerse AE: Clinically relevant mutations that
cause derepression of the _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ mtrC-mtrD-mtrE
efflux pump system confer different levels of antimicrobial resistance
and in vivo fitness. Mol Microbiol 2008; 70(2): 462-78. [Available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2602950/].
7. Young H, Moyes A, McMillan A: Azithromycin and erythromycin
resistant _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ following treatment with
azithromycin. Int J STD AIDS 1997; 8(5): 299-302. [Abstract available
at http://ijsa.rsmjournals.com/cgi/content/abstract/8/5/299].
8. CDC. Fluoroquinolone-resistance in _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_,
Hawaii, 1999, and decreased susceptibility to azithromycin in _N.
gonorrhoeae_, Missouri, 1999. MMWR 2000; 49(37): 833-7. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4937a1.htm.
9. Chisholm SA, Neal TJ, Alawattegama AB, et al: Emergence of
high-level azithromycin resistance in _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ in
England and Wales. J Antimicrob Chemother 2009; 64(2): 353-8.
[Available at http://jac.oxfordjournals.org/content/64/2/353.long].
10. Galarza PG, Alcala B, Salcedo C, et al: Emergence of high level
azithromycin-resistant _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ strain isolated in
Argentina. Sex Transm Dis 2009; 36(12):787-8. [Abstract available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19734823].

--
Communicated by:
HealthMap Alerts via ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of California can be seen
at http://healthmap.org/r/00DY.

The following is extracted from the US CDC recommendations for the
treatment of gonorrhea in the USA: CDC STD Treatment Guidelines 2010;
http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/gonococcal-infections.htm.

Patients infected with _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ frequently are
co-infected with _Chlamydia trachomatis_; this finding has led to the
recommendation that patients treated for gonococcal infection also be
treated routinely with a regimen that is effective against
uncomplicated genital _C. trachomatis_ infection.

For uncomplicated gonococcal infections of the cervix, urethra, and
rectum, recommended treatments are 250 mg of ceftriaxone in a single
intramuscular (IM) dose or 400 mg of cefixime [now available in the
United States, see
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5716a5.htm] in a single
oral dose, plus [treatment of chlamydia] azithromycin 1g orally in a
single dose or doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days.

Ceftriaxone in a single injection of 250 mg provides sustained, high
bactericidal levels in the blood. Extensive clinical experience
indicates that ceftriaxone is safe and effective for the treatment of
uncomplicated gonorrhea at all anatomic sites, curing 99.2 percent of
uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal and 98.9 percent of pharyngeal
infections in published clinical trials. A 250 mg dose of ceftriaxone
is now recommended over a 125 mg dose given the 1) increasingly wide
geographic distribution of isolates demonstrating decreased
susceptibility to cephalosporins in vitro, 2) reports of ceftriaxone
treatment failures, 3) improved efficacy of ceftriaxone 250 mg in
pharyngeal infection (which is often unrecognized), and 4) the utility
of having a simple and consistent recommendation for treatment
regardless of the anatomic site involved.

A 400 mg oral dose of cefixime does not provide as high, nor as
sustained, a bactericidal level as that provided by the 250 mg dose of
ceftriaxone. In published clinical trials, the 400 mg dose cured 97.5
percent of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal (95 percent CI =
95.4 percent-99.8 percent) and 92.3 percent of pharyngeal gonococcal
infections (95 percent CI = 74.9 percent-99.1 percent). Although
cefixime can be administered orally, this advantage is offset by the
limited efficacy of cefixime (as well as other oral cephalosporins)
for treating gonococcal infections of the pharynx. Providers should
inquire about oral sexual exposure and if reported, treat these
patients with ceftriaxone because of this drug's well-documented
efficacy in treating pharyngeal infection.

Spectinomycin, which is useful in persons who cannot tolerate
cephalosporins, is expensive, must be injected, and is not available
in the United States (updates available at
http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment). However, it has been effective in
published clinical trials, curing 98.2 percent of uncomplicated
urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections. Spectinomycin has poor
efficacy against pharyngeal infection (51.8 percent; 95 percent CI =
38.7 percent-64.9 percent). - Mod.ML]
See Also
2007
----
Antibiotic resistance, N. gonorrheae - USA: fluoroquinolones 20070413.12
2002
----
Gonorrhea, multidrug resistant - USA (CA, HI) 20020510.4150
2000
----
Antibiotic resistance, gonococci - USA: 1999 20001222.2257
Antibiotic resistance, gonococci - UK (Scotland) 20001209.2164
1998
----
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrheae - USA(02) 19980531.1043
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrheae - USA 19980401.0603
1996
----
Antibiotic resistance (11): Neisseria gonorrhoeae 19960404.0637
.................................................ml/mj/mpp
</body>
