<header id=015334>
Published Date: 2011-07-27 13:23:13 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Aichi virus, human pathogenicity
Archive Number: 20110727.2261
</header>
<body id=015334>
AICHI VIRUS, HUMAN PATHOGENICITY
********************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 26 Jul 2011
Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy) News
[edited]
http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/cidrap/content/fs/food-disease/news/jul2611newsscan.html


Group says Aichi virus an authentic human pathogen
--------------------------------------------------
Research from Germany and Russia identified human shedding of Aichi
virus (AiV) but no other viral or bacterial agents in patients with
gastroenteritis, substantiating the virus's pathogenicity, according
to an online report from Emerging Infectious Diseases (EID).

AiV, a novel human picornavirus, genus _Kobuvirus_, was described
first in 1991 and has been linked with spontaneous and food-associated
diarrhea in humans and found in contaminated water, but no
quantitative data on viral shedding have been available. Stool samples
from outpatients with gastroenteritis were tested through a highly
sensitive real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) targeting a specific region of the virus. AiV but no other
pathogen was detected in 10 (2 percent) of 499 patients with
gastroenteritis; none of 39 controls or 118 patients involved in a
foodborne outbreak tested positive for AiV (differences between groups
were not statistically significant). All AiV patients had abdominal
pain, diarrhea, or nausea, and in none was there a clear association
with a foodborne cause, sociologic risk factor, or contact with
animals. Samples were collected throughout 2004, but all AiV cases
occurred from October to December of that year in a geographically
limited area. After further testing, the authors concluded that "The
temporal and geographic accumulation of cases, together with the
observed sequence variation, supports locally and temporally
restricted circulation of AiV with human-to-human transmission, rather
than a point-source epidemic pattern as observed in foodborne
infections."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The citation for this paper is: Drexler JF, Baumgarte S, de Souza
Luna LK, Eschbach-Bludau M, Lukashev AN, Drosten C: Aichi virus
shedding in high concentrations in patients with acute diarrhea. Emerg
Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 [date cited].
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/17/8/101556.htm, and the Abstract
reads as follows:

"We assessed Aichi virus shedding in patients with gastroenteritis and
negative test results for other viral and bacterial infections. High
concentrations of up to 1.32 x 10 to the 12th RNA copies/g stool were
found in 10 (2.0 percent) of 499 outpatients sampled in northern
Germany, 2004. These data substantiate Aichi virus pathogenicity in
humans.

The family _Picornaviridae_ includes 12 established genera, and
representatives of 5 of these have been found in humans
(_Enterovirus_, _Hepatovirus_, _Parechovirus_, _Cardiovirus_, and
_Kobuvirus_). Among those, human pathogenicity has been proven
consistently only for the enteroviruses (including polioviruses),
hepatitis A virus, and the parechoviruses. Several as-yet-unclassified
picornaviruses have been found over the past few years in humans,
termed cosavirus, klassevirus, and salivirus. For gastrointestinal
pathogens, data on virus quantity in stool can exclude ingestion from
nutritional sources of viruses that may be detected but do not
replicate in the human gut. Prevalence studies with appropriate
control groups and proof of the absence of co-infections with other
pathogens are required to provide evidence in favor of human
pathogenicity. For most of the novel viruses, these data are still
awaited.

A novel human picornavirus termed _Aichi virus_ (AiV; genus
_Kobuvirus_), was described initially in 1991 and epidemiologically
linked with spontaneous and food-associated diarrhea in humans.
Recently, it was also detected in sewage-polluted water. However, no
quantitative data of AiV shedding have become available so far,
possibly because of technical peculiarities such as high genomic GC
[guanine-cytosine] content (around 60 percent) and strong RNA
secondary structures, which may have contributed to a lack of sequence
information and prevented more precise molecular detection. In this
study, we analyzed well-established cohorts of patients with
gastroenteritis and an appropriate control group. Stool samples from
patients who had negative test results for other common viruses and
bacterial infections showed high AiV shedding by highly sensitive
real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR), thereby substantiating
AiV human pathogenicity."

The authors comment that virus shedding appeared unrelated to the
severity of symptoms, and clinical presentations were generally mild.
Contrary to the findings of previous studies from France and Tunisia,
no food association could be observed in this study. In agreement with
some, but not all, published reports, no case of AiV-associated
gastroenteritis from this study had apparent co-infections, further
supporting AiV pathogenicity in humans. The geographic and temporal
accumulation of cases, together with the observed sequence variation,
supports locally and temporally restricted circulation of AiV with
human-to-human transmission, rather than a point-source epidemic
pattern as observed in foodborne infections.

The mode of human-to-human transmission of Aichi virus and its
importance as a cause of gastroenteritis remain enigmatic. - Mod.CP]

.................................................cp/mj/dk
</body>
