<header id=041650>
Published Date: 2011-08-27 10:09:03 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Ethylene glycol (antifreeze), vinegar - china
Archive Number: 20110827.2612
</header>
<body id=041650>
ETHYLENE GLYCOL (ANTIFREEZE), VINEGAR - CHINA
*********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

******
[1]
Date: 22 Aug 2011
Source: Wales on Line [edited]
http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/latest-world-news/2011/08/22/mass-food-poisoning-from-tainted-vinegar-kills-11-in-china-91466-29279661/


Mass food poisoning from tainted vinegar kills 11 in China
----------------------------------------------------------
Vinegar tainted with antifreeze is suspected of killing 11 people and
causing sickness in another 120 after a communal Ramadan meal in
China's far western region of Xinjiang. Investigators suspect the
victims consumed vinegar that was put in 2 plastic barrels that had
previously been used to store toxic antifreeze, the official Xinhua
News Agency reported.

It said the mass food poisoning occurred Saturday night in a village
close to Hotan city in Xinjiang, a region which borders Afghanistan,
Pakistan and Central Asia.

The victims were ethnic Muslims who were sharing an evening meal after
the daily fast observed during the holy month of Ramadan. Xinhua said
children as young as 6 were among the dead. One person among the 120
sickened was still in critical condition. Authorities were still
testing to confirm the source of the poisoning, it said.

China's food safety record has been battered by the rampant use of
illegal or substandard additives by unscrupulous food producers. Milk
powder laced with the industrial chemical melamine killed at least 6
children and sickened 300 000 in 2008. Producers added the
nitrogen-rich melamine powder so their milk would seem higher in
protein.

Revenge attacks using rat poison or other chemicals are also common in
China, where access to firearms and other deadly weapons is tightly
controlled.

In April [2011], 3 children died and 35 others were sickened by milk
tainted with nitrite. An investigation showed that a local dairy
farmer had put the poison into their competitor's milk supply. But
accidental contamination is also a problem, caused by low hygiene
standards, particularly in rural areas, and weak quality control by
regulators.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: 22 Aug 2011
Source: Reuters [edited]
http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/22/china-foodsafety-idUSL4E7JM0KN20110822


Vinegar stored in plastic barrels that once contained antifreeze is
suspected of killing 11 people and making 120 others sick in China's
northwest Xinjiang region, state media said on Monday [22 Aug 2011],
in the latest deadly food safety scandal to hit the country.

Police said residents of Sangzhu village, near Hotan, in the vast
region that is home to many ethnic Uighur Muslims, had consumed the
toxic vinegar on Saturday [20 Aug 2011] during a large Ramadan feast,
the official Xinhua news agency reported.

Authorities were still investigating the poisoning, which killed at
least one 6-year-old child.

"(An) initial probe shows that villagers ate vinegar from 2 plastic
barrels which were used to contain antifreeze, before feeling sick,"
Xinhua said, though it added the cause has not been officially
confirmed.

China has been plagued by food safety scandals in recent years and
leaders have struggled to rein in the unruly food sector despite tough
punishments and repeated vows to crack down on the problem.

Since July [2011], Chinese courts have sentenced at least a dozen
people to jail, including one person who received a suspended death
sentence, for their roles in producing or selling pork tainted with a
toxic chemicals.

China said it would give rewards to people who report on food safety
issues, such as the illegal use of additives or sale of meat from
animals which die of disease, but has not said how much money it would
offer.

In 2008, at least 6 children died and nearly 300 000 fell ill from
drinking milk made from powder laced with melamine, an industrial
compound added to milk and milk power to give misleadingly high
results in protein tests.

[Byline: Michael Martina, reporter
Ben Blanchard, Alex Richardson, editors]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: 21 Aug 2011
Source: China Daily [edited]
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/usa/china/2011-08/21/content_13158822.htm


A total of 11 people have died in a food poisoning in northwest
China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, local authorities said
Sunday [21 Aug 2011].

As of 6 pm Saturday [20 Aug 2011], more than 150 people have shown
symptoms of poisoning and were sent to hospitals, the Hotan City
Committee of the Communist Party of China said in a statement.

Villagers from the township of Sangzhu in Pishan County, Hotan, have
shown symptoms of vomiting and convulsions after their suppers on
Friday [19 Aug 2011], according to the statement.

The poisoned villagers were then rushed to local hospitals. Those who
were in serious conditions are still receiving treatments in
hospitals, said the statement, without elaborating the number of
them.

An investigation into the cause of the poisoning is underway.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Ethylene glycol is a colorless, odorless, sweet-tasting chemical
found in many household products, including antifreeze, de-icing
products, detergents, paints, and cosmetics. It is poisonous if
swallowed.

The first symptom of ethylene glycol ingestion is similar to the
feeling caused by drinking alcohol (ethanol). Within a few hours, more
toxic effects become apparent. Symptoms may include nausea, vomiting,
convulsions, stupor, or even coma.

An overdose of ethylene glycol can damage the brain, lungs, liver,
kidneys, and lungs. The poisoning causes disturbances in the body's
chemistry, including metabolic acidosis. The disturbances may be
severe enough to cause profound shock, organ failure, and death. As
little as 120 milliliters (approximately 4 fluid ounces) of ethylene
glycol may be enough to kill an average-sized man.

Ethylene glycol toxicity should be suspected in anyone who is severely
ill after drinking an unknown substance, especially if they at first
appear drunk and do not have a smell of alcohol on their breath.
Diagnosis of ethylene glycol toxicity is usually made through a
combination of blood, urine, and other tests. The goal of treatment is
to support the body's vital functions and remove the poison from the
body.

Most people with ethylene glycol poisoning will need to be admitted to
a hospital's intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring, and may
need a breathing machine (respirator). Those who recently swallowed
the ethylene glycol may have their stomach pumped (suctioned). This
can help remove some of the poison.

Other treatments may include:
-- Activated charcoal
-- Sodium bicarbonate solution given through a vein (IV) to reverse
severe acidosis
-- Antidotes that slow the formation of the poisonous by-products in
the body

In severe cases, hemodialysis may be used to directly remove the
ethylene glycol and other poisonous substances from the blood.
Dialysis reduces the time needed for the body to clear the toxins.
Dialysis is also needed by patients who develop severe kidney failure
as a result of ethylene glycol poisoning. It may be needed for many
months afterwards.

If treated promptly, patients with ethylene glycol poisoning can
recover, even from renal failure or coma. However, with delayed or no
treatment, ethylene glycol poisoning can be deadly.

The epidemiological investigation to determine the vinegar contained
ethylene glycol and to find the barrels that contained it had to an
investigation in determination. All of these articles give slightly
different accounts of where and how the vinegar became contaminated.
All of these articles give a slightly different number of individuals
involved.

It should be noted that the total dose of ethylene glycol was likely
not sufficient to make these individuals sick immediately, but more
likely within 3-4 days of consumption of the tainted product. If the
dose of ethylene glycol was high enough to produce illness shortly
after consumption of the product, then the investigation would have
been more straightforward.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0001778/ - Mod.TG

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for China's Xinjiang Uygur
Autonomous Region is available at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1aQE - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
2009
----
Diethylene glycol, pharmaceutical agents, children - Nigeria 20091212.4226
Ethylene glycol poisoning, fatal - Nigeria: teething syrup 20090207.0563
2007
----
Diethylene glycol contamination, toothpaste - Multicountry ex China 20070524.1660
2006
----
Diethylene glycol contamination, medications - Panama (02) 20061028.3092
Diethylene glycol contamination, medications - Panama 20061014.2947
Undiagnosed deaths - Panama (06): diethylene glycol 20061012.2930
.................................................mpp/sb/tg/ejp/dk
</body>
