<header id=011601>
Published Date: 2011-05-19 14:01:16 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Camelpox - India: northwest, zoonotic cases
Archive Number: 20110519.1515
</header>
<body id=011601>
CAMELPOX - INDIA: NORTHWEST, ZOONOTIC CASES
*******************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 22 Apr 2011
From: Greg Folkers <GFOLKERS@niaid.nih.gov>
Source: Vet Microbiol. (Epub. ahead of print) [edited]
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=Zoonotic%20cases%20of%20camelpox%20in%20India


Zoonotic cases of camelpox infection in India. By: Bera BC,
Shanmugasundaram K, Barua S, Venkatesan G, Virmani N, Riyesh T, Gulati
BR, Bhanuprakash V,Vaid RK, Kakker NK, Malik P, Bansal M, Gadvi S,
Singh RV, Yadav V, Sardarilal, Nagarajan G, Balamurugan V,Hosamani M,
Pathak KM, Singh RK.

At: Veterinary Type Culture Centre, National Research Centre on
Equines, Sirsa Road, Hisar, Haryana, India.

Abstract
--------
This study reports the 1st conclusive evidence of zoonotic camelpox
virus (CMLV) infection in humans associated with outbreaks in
dromedarian camels (_Camelus dromedaries_) in the northwest region of
India during 2009. CMLV infection is usually restricted to camels and
causes localised skin lesions but occasionally leads to a generalised
form of disease. However, the present outbreak involved camel handlers
and attendants, with clinical manifestations such as papules,
vesicles, ulceration and finally scabs over fingers and hands. In
camels, the pock-like lesions were distributed over the hairless parts
of the body.

On the basis of clinical and epidemiological features coupled with
serological tests and molecular characterization of the causative
agent, CMLV zoonosis was confirmed in 3 human cases. Clinical samples
such as skin scabs/swabs and blood collected from affected animals and
humans were analysed initially for the presence of CMLV-specific
antigen and antibodies by counter immunoelectrophoresis (CIE); serum
neutralization test (SNT); plaque-reduction neutralization test (PRNT)
and indirect immunoperoxidase test, which was later confirmed by
amplification of CMLV-specific ankyrin repeat protein (C18L) gene.

Virus isolation was successful only from samples collected from
camels. Furthermore, sequence analyses based on 3 full-length envelope
protein genes (A27L, H3L and D8L) revealed 95.2-99.8 percent and
93.1-99.3 percent homology with other Orthopoxviruses at nucleotide
and amino acid levels, respectively. Phylogram of the 3 genes revealed
a close relationship of CMLV with Variola virus (VARV). Considering
the emerging and re-emerging nature of the virus, its genetic
relatedness to VARV, zoonotic potential, and productivity losses in
camels, control measures are imperative in curtailing economic and
public health impacts of the disease. This is the 1st instance of
laboratory confirmed camelpox zoonosis in India.

--
Communicated by:
Greg Folkers <GFOLKERS@niaid.nih.gov>

[Previously, it had been supposed that human infection did not occur
because of the frequent exposure of unvaccinated camel handlers to
florid cases of camelpox infection (Veterinary Virology, Murphy,
Gibbs, Horzinek and Studdert, Academic Pres, 3rd ed., 1999). The above
report provides well-documented evidence of an outbreak of zoonotic
camelpox virus (CMLV) infection in humans associated with disease in
dromedarian camels (_Camelus dromedaries_) in the northwest region of
India during 2009.

According to Afonsso et al. (Volume 295, Issue 1, 30 Mar 2002, Pages
1-9): "Camelpox virus (CMLV), is a member of the genus _Orthopoxvirus_
of the virus family _Poxviridae_. It is the etiologic agent of a
disease of camels. The 205,719-bp CMLV genome contains 211 putative
genes and consists of a central region bound by identical inverted
terminal repeats of approximately 7 kb. A high degree of similarity in
gene order, gene content, and amino acid composition in the region
located between CMLV017 and CMLV184 (average 96 percent amino acid
identity) to vaccinia virus (VACV) indicates a close structural and
functional relationship between CMLV and other known orthopoxviruses
(OPVs). Notably, CMLV contains a unique region of approximately 3 kb,
which encodes 3 ORFs (CMLV185, CMLV186, CMLV187) absent in other OPVs.
Among OPVs, CMLV is the most closely related to variola virus (VARV)
[smallpox virus], sharing all genes involved in basic replicative
functions and the majority of genes involved in other host-related
functions. Differences between CMLV and VARV include deletion and
disruption of a large number of genes. 27 CMLV ORFs are absent in
VARV, including 7 full-length homologues of NMDA-like receptor,
phospholipase D, Schlafen, MT-4 virulence, kelch, VACV C8L, and cowpox
(CPXV) B21R proteins. 38 CMLV ORFs, some of which are fragments of
larger genes, differ in size from corresponding VARV ORFs by more than
10 percent (amino acids). Genome structure and phylogenetic analysis
of DNA sequences for all ORFs indicate that CMLV is clearly distinct
from VARV and VACV and, as it has been suggested for VARV, it may have
originated from a CPXV virus-like ancestor."

In summary, camelpox virus is more closely related (phylogenetically)
to variola virus [smallpox virus] than any other member of the genus
_orthopoxvirus_, but it exhibits significant differences in genome
structure. It remains to be established to what extent this strain of
camelpox virus infecting camels in northwest India differs from
strains prevalent elsewhere which have not been reported to cause
human disease. - Mod.CP]

[Photo of dromedary & calf
http://www.citypictures.org/r-africa-143-egypt-216-dromedary-camels-sahara-egypt-2414.htm
Lesions of smallpox, mousepox & camelpox
http://www.nature.com/nrmicro/journal/v3/n3/images/nrmicro1099-f1.jpg
- Mpd.JW]
See Also
2002
----
Camelpox virus, relationship to smallpox virus 20020418.3981
.................................................cp/msp/jw
</body>
