<header id=026601>
Published Date: 2011-11-26 16:39:35 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed equine encephalitis - Argentina
Archive Number: 20111126.3458
</header>
<body id=026601>
UNDIAGNOSED EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS - ARGENTINA
*******************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 26 Nov 2011
Source: Diario de Cuyo [in Spanish, transl. Mod.TY, edited]
http://www.diariodecuyo.com.ar/home/new_noticia.php?noticia_id=492021


Yesterday [25 Nov 2011], the Faunistico Park closed its doors because
the suspected presence of a virus that may affect people that may have
caused the deaths of 6 burros, leaving 2 in agony. According to the
suspicions of specialists, this situation may be caused by [a virus]
of the Togaviridae family, that causes equine encephalitis, an
infectious disease that may affect humans. The Rivadavia Municipality
and Public Health [staff] said that they have taken precautions to
avoid virus spread, in case it exists there.

This past Wednesday [23 Nov 2011], the 1st burro died after showing
symptoms similar to those of encephalitis [a figure with text is
shown, implicating an alphavirus], and this alerted the workers of
Faunistico Park who informed the authorities immediately. In less than
24 hours, 5 more animals died, which required isolation of [burro]
rides [in the area].

"We advised SENASA [Servicio Nacional de Sanidad y Calidad
Agroalimentaria; National Service for Agricultural Food Safety and
Quality] and Public Health what had occurred and on Thursday [24 Nov
2011], specialists were sent. They took samples from the dead animals
and sent them to Buenos Aires for tests and determine which virus is
involved that might be transmitted to humans by mosquito bites. As a
precaution, we decided to close the park in order to avoid possible
infection of people. And we will re-open it when we are sure that
there is no danger," said Eduardo Burgos, Rivadavia Secretary of
Culture and Tourism.

The head of the Program for Vector Control of Public Health, Ruben
Carrizo Paez, stated that they are 60 per cent convinced that the
Faunistico [Park] burros not die of the virus that causes equine
encephalitis because they did not find mosquito larvae or adults of
this [vector] species, which are those that transmit the disease
[virus] between equine animals and humans.

He said that as a precaution, the entire park was treated with a
potent insecticide. He indicated that blood samples were taken from
employees of the [burro] ride, which were also sent to Buenos Aires
for testing, as a precaution.

"The people should be at ease because we have isolated the park and
because encephalitis can be fatal for people only in very limited
cases and [those] of extreme vulnerability," the specialist stated.

[Byline: Fabiana Juarez]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Until the laboratory results are available, it is not possible to
determine the cause of these encephalitis cases. There are several
alphaviruses and flaviviruses in Argentina that could cause
encephalitis in the burros. However, failure to find possible mosquito
vectors does argue against arthropod-borne viruses. It is extremely
difficult to isolate infectious virus from brain tissue from animals
dead from arthropod-borne equine encephalitis viruses, but PCR
detection of viral RNA may be successful.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map showing the location of
Rivadavia department in San Juan province can be accessed at
http://healthmap.org/r/1tqE. - Mod.TY]

[The authorities are clearly worried about one of the equine
encephalitides. They took the precaution of spraying the area and
closing the park. Closing the park may not solve the problem as
vectors can travel many miles at a time, especially carried by wind.
If the authorities are concerned about Eastern equine encephalitis
(EEE), then owners should be instructed to vaccinate their animals.
EEE is transmitted by mosquitoes from birds to the person. It does not
normally transmit from mammals to humans.

The concern of the virus entering people and causing fatalities makes
me think this virus could be the Venezuelan equine encephalopathy
(VEE).

People should be reminded to use insect repellant and to wear long
sleeves. There are mosquito and fly repellant available for equines
and owners should be encouraged to use them. - http://mod.tg/ -
Mod.TG]

.................................................ty/ejp/tg/lm
</body>
