<header id=005476>
Published Date: 2011-11-12 14:53:35 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Meningitis, drug-induced - India: (Mumbai)
Archive Number: 20111112.3356
</header>
<body id=005476>
MENINGITIS, DRUG-INDUCED - INDIA: (MUMBAI)
******************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

******
[1]
Date: Fri 11 Nov 2011
Source: MidDay [edited]
http://www.mid-day.com/news/2011/nov/111111-Hospitals-can-give-you-meningitis.htm


Over the past 5 months, 11 patients contracted a rare drug-induced
type of the disease at 3 BMC hospitals; doctors believe it could be
stemming from contaminated samples of anaesthetic drug bupivacaine.

In a shocking reversal of the natural order of things, 11 patients,
who were admitted across 3 civic hospitals over the past 5 months,
ended up contracting a disease which was far more lethal than the ones
that they were seeking treatment for.

Within hours of undergoing their respective procedures, these patients
developed meningitis -- an acute inflammation of the brain.
Anaesthesiologists in KEM, Sion and Bhabha hospital, where the
patients were diagnosed with the infection, suspect that the
administration of an anaesthetic drug -- which is injected into the
spinal cord prior to procedures -- may have been responsible for the
disease.

The suspected drug is bupivacaine, which is supplied to the BMC
hospitals by Ciron, a Jogeshwari-based pharmaceutical company, as per
the civic body's rate contract.

Meningitis is a potentially fatal inflammation of the protective
membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. In some rare cases, it
is drug-induced, caused by the administration of contaminated drugs,
such as anaesthesia.

Mid DAY met one of the unlucky 11 [patients], who recently underwent a
procedure for ligament reconstruction. Soon after the surgery at KEM
hospital, however, [the patient] started showing symptoms of high
fever with chills and a headache. "He fell unconscious and started
convulsing, as a result of which we had to admit him to the ICU," said
a doctor. "Ligament reconstruction allows a patient to go home hours
after the surgery. But [the patient] ended up with meningitis. The
doctors have clearly diagnosed him with post spinal meningitis," said
a doctor.

Post spinal meningitis is a rare medical complication caused by the
introduction of anaesthesia through the spine. The disease may be
caused by the mechanism of administration, the contamination of
equipment used, or the contamination of the drug itself.

[The patient], who has been kept under observation is now undergoing
rigorous antibiotic treatment to cure him. "The doctor had told us
that I could go home on the very day of the surgery, so I was shocked
when I ended up in the ICU," said [the patient] who still suffers from
headaches.

Besides [this patient], 10 other patients who were admitted to the
hospitals to be cured of sundry ailments ended up contracting the
deadly disease. 3 of them were new mothers, who had undergone
C-section deliveries. Out of the 11 patients, 4 cases each have been
reported in Sion and Bhabha hospital, while the 3 others were admitted
at KEM for treatment.

Of the 4 cases reported at Sion hospital, 2 patients were critical,
but were pulled out of infection after rigorous antibiotic treatment.
The others are also stable after receiving treatment.

Ciron supplies approximately 2 lakh ampules of bupivacaine annually,
to various civic hospitals. Dr Sanjay Oak, dean of KEM hospital and
director of major civic hospitals, said, "I have received the
complaints. Anaesthesiologists suspect that an anaesthetic drug used
during procedures is causing the disease. We will refer this matter to
the FDA. To prevent other casualties, we have stopped using the drugs
being delivered by the company to our hospitals."

Dr Shashikant Wadekar, medical superintendent, Bhabha hospital, said,
"After our anaesthesiologists brought this anomaly to my notice, we
stopped using the drug. All the 4 patients had developed post spinal
meningitis, but we treated them here. They are now stable."

Dr Sandhya Kamat, dean of Sion hospital, said, "After doctors
contended that the anaesthesia could be responsible for the
meningitis, we had sent samples of it to FDA for examination. They
have [confirmed] that it is a standard sample of the drug. However, as
a precautionary measure, we have discarded the drug received from our
pharmaceutical company, and have got another sample from a different
company."

Dr Ami Merchant, consultant anaesthesiologist at Lilavati hospital
said, "Bupivacaine is a very common drug used as spinal anaesthesia.
It is very safe. Incidence of drug-induced meningitis is very rare.
There are several ways in which one can contract post-operative
meningitis. In some cases, doctors fail to follow strict aseptic
procedures and equipment, like using antiseptic masks and gear, or
sterile gloves. In other cases, the contamination of a drug during
manufacture can ultimately be responsible for the disease. The
occurrence of 11 cases over 5 months needs to be studied."

--
Communicated by
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date Sat 12 Nov 2011
Source: MidDay [edited]
http://www.mid-day.com/news/2011/nov/121111-mumbai-After-meningitis-cases-FDA-inspects-pharma-plant.htm


After Mid DAY's [report] on 11 patients who contracted meningitis
after being administered local anaesthetic drug bupivacaine at 3 civic
hospitals, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has inspected the
manufacturing plant of Ciron Pharmaceuticals, which supplies the drug
to the hospitals. It is also collecting bupivacaine samples from the
facilities for testing them.

Civic doctors said they were shocked over the apathy of the
administration. "Even if there was the slightest of doubt about the
anaesthetic, the BMC hospitals should have stopped the drugs, instead
of waiting for 11 patients to get meningitis," said a senior doctor
requesting anonymity.

They also claimed they were compelled to use the drug despite having
doubts as a circular from the director's office prohibited them from
prescribing it from pharmacies outside. After 2 cases of meningitis
surfaced from Sion hospital, the doctors suspected that the drugs had
a role to play in the infection and alerted the FDA, which checked the
drugs and gave it a clean chit.

K B Shende, joint commissioner, FDA (drugs), said, "Sion hospital had
given us the drugs for examination earlier. After testing them, we
found them to be of standard quality. But now, we have started a fresh
investigation and we are looking at all possible causes of infection
as well as contamination."

However, when Sion, Bhabha and KEM hospitals reported cases of post
spinal meningitis (contamination in the body while administration of
the anaesthetic) even after FDA's clean chit, they should have
immediately stopped using it, doctors opine.

Dr Sanjay Oak, dean of KEM hospital and director of major civic
hospitals, was unreachable for comment. Rajul Patel, health committee
chairman, BMC, said, "We will initiate an inquiry. Doctors and the
drug's manufacturing company will have to answer." Kirti Shah,
director, Ciron pharmaceutical, said, "We are cooperating with the FDA
in their investigations."

--
Communicated:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Bupivacaine is an anesthetic drug that can be administered by
epidural or intrathecal injection via lumbar puncture. Intrathecal
drug administration means the introduction of a drug by injection into
the subarachnoid space around the spinal cord. Drug may also enter the
subarachnoid space inadvertently after injection into the epidural
space.

Meningitis that follows drug administration by lumbar puncture can be
either "septic" or "aseptic." The term "septic meningitis" is used to
indicate that infectious agents such as bacteria were introduced
intrathecally at the time of the lumbar puncture. The term "aseptic
meningitis" following intrathecal drug administration usually refers
to meningitis due to the drug itself or due to a chemical contaminant
of the drug or the equipment used to administer the drug.

The clinical presentation of drug-induced aseptic meningitis is very
similar to that of the septic variety, with fever, headache, stiff
neck, and changes in mental status; the prognosis of drug-induced
aseptic meningitis is generally excellent with complete long-term
recovery. A hypersensitivity mechanism is invoked to explain
drug-induced aseptic meningitis.

There are several reports in the literature of drug-induced aseptic
meningitis associated with intrathecal administration of bupivacaine
(http://www.hopkinsguides.com/hopkins/ub/citation/17641986/[Bupivacaine_induced_aseptic_meningitis]_,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17641986,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20306069, and
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19653822). It is unclear from the
news reports above if the 11 patients suffered from the septic or
aseptic variety. More information to clarify this issue would be
appreciated.

Clusters of cases of septic meningitis have been reported as a rare
complication of a lumbar puncture performed for various reasons.
Microorganisms that have caused meningitis following lumbar puncture
include _Streptococcus salivarius_, _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_,
_Staphylococcus aureus_, _Acinetobacter_ spp., and _Aspergillus_ spp.
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15019223).

The following is extracted from the U.S. CDC Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report (MMWR). Bacterial Meningitis After Intrapartum Spinal
Anesthesia --- New York and Ohio, 2008-2009. January 29, 2010 /
59(03);65-69. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5903a1.htm

"The intrathecal space is entered during several diagnostic and
therapeutic spinal procedures, including lumbar puncture, myelography,
and spinal anesthesia, and can occur inadvertently during epidural
anesthesia. Cases of meningitis have been reported after all of these
procedures, although most published cases have involved spinal
anesthesia (2). A literature review identified only 179 cases of post
spinal procedure meningitis reported worldwide during 1952--2005 (2);
in contrast, approximately 300 000 diagnostic lumbar punctures were
performed on inpatients in the United States in 2007 alone (4). Post
spinal procedure meningitis causes serious infections; in one case
series, one third of cases resulted in death (5).

Potential sources of bacterial introduction into the intrathecal space
during spinal procedures include intrinsic or extrinsic contamination
of needles, syringes, or injected medications; inadequately
decontaminated patient skin; inadequately cleaned health-care provider
hands; a contaminated sterile field; and droplet transmission from the
health-care provider's upper airway. _Streptococcus salivarius_ and
other viridans group streptococci, which are normal mouth flora, are
the most commonly identified etiologies of meningitis after spinal
procedures, accounting for 49 percent and 60 percent of cases in
literature reviews (2,6). Droplet transmission of oral flora has been
suggested as the most likely route of transmission in reports of
clusters associated with a single health-care provider (7,8).

References:
-----------
2. Baer E. Post-dural puncture bacterial meningitis. Anesthesiology
2006;105: 381--93.
3. Moen V, Dahlgren N, Irestedt L. Severe neurological complications
after central neuraxial blockades in Sweden 1990--1999. Anesthesiology
2004;101:950--9.
4. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Healthcare Cost and
Utilization Project (HCUPnet). Available at
http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/hcupnet.jsp. Accessed January 22, 2010.
5. Pandian JD, Sarada C, Radhakrishnan VV, Kishore A. Iatrogenic
meningitis after lumbar puncture-a preventable health hazard. J Hosp
Infect 2004;56:119--24.
6. Yaniv LG, Potasman I. Iatrogenic meningitis: an increasing role for
resistant viridans streptococci? Case report and review of the last 20
years. Scand J Infect Dis 2000;32:693--6.
7. Schneeberger P, Janssen M, Voss A. Alpha-hemolytic streptococci: a
major pathogen of iatrogenic meningitis following lumbar puncture.
Case reports and a review of the literature. Infection
1996;24:29--33.
8. Veringa E, Van Belkum A, Schellekens H. Iatrogenic meningitis by
Streptococcus salivarius following lumbar puncture. J Hosp Infect
1995;29:316--8."

Another postulated mechanism for post-lumbar puncture meningitis is
bacteremia at the time of the lumbar puncture; the bacteria in the
patient's blood gain access to the intrathecal space because of
microscopic bleeding caused by insertion of the needle
(http://bja.oxfordjournals.org/content/78/6/635.full.pdf).

Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) is the civic body that
governs the city of Mumbai. KEM and Sion are teaching hospitals and
Bhabha is a municipal hospital in Mumbai. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map of India, showing the location of Mumbai, can be
accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/1iZ2. - Mod.ML]
See Also
2002
----
Fungal meningitis, contaminated drug - USA (03) 20021212.6046
Fungal meningitis, contaminated drug - USA: alert (02) 20021117.5831
Fungal meningitis, contaminated drug - USA: alert 20021002.5444
.................................................sb/ml/ejp/dk
</body>
