<header id=010476>
Published Date: 2011-10-28 08:40:11 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Crimean-Congo hem. fever - Spain: (EX) infected ticks
Archive Number: 20111028.3209
</header>
<body id=010476>
CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - SPAIN: (EXTREMADURA) INFECTED TICKS
*********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 27 Oct 2011
From: Agustin Estrada Pena <aestrada@unizar.es> [edited]


Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus detected in ticks from
south-western Europe
----------------------------------------------------------------------
(Authors: A Estrada Pena 1, MSc, PhD, DVM; AM Palomar 2, MSc, Bachelor
in Biology; P Santibanez 2, MSc, Bachelor in Biology and Biochemistry;
N Sanchez 1, MSc; MA Habela 3, MSc, PhD, DVM; A Portillo 2, MSc, PhD,
Bachelor in Biology; L Romero 2, Laboratory technician; JA Oteo 2, MD,
PhD)
1. Department of Parasitology. Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Zaragoza. Spain.
2. Center of Rickettsiosis and Arthropod-borne Diseases. Hospital San
Pedro-CIBIR, La Rioja. Spain.
3. Department of Parasitology. Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Caceres. Spain.)

Abstract
--------
Two pools of _Hyalomma lusitanicum_ [ticks], each one containing RNA
from 10 ticks, were found positive to Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
virus (CCHFv) after screening of 117 adults, collected in Caceres
([Extremadura] Spain), by RT-PCR. A sequence (the other one failed)
showed that a CCHFv strain with 98 percent similarity with those
recorded in Mauritania and Senegal is circulating in south-western
Europe.

Text
----
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFv), genus _Nairovirus_,
family _Bunyaviridae_, is responsible for outbreaks of severe
hemorrhagic fever in humans with case fatalities as high as 30 percent
(1,2). The disease was initially recognized by Russian scientists in
the 1940s (3), and the virus was first isolated in the Democratic
Republic of Congo some years later (4). CCHFv is reported throughout
broad regions of Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. Reports
linking the transmission of the virus with an infected vector have
involved ticks of the genus _Hyalomma_ (5). It seems that,
additionally, _Hyalomma_ spp. are necessary for the maintenance of
active foci of the virus in the field, even within periods of silent
activity. Several vertebrates are involved in the natural transmission
cycle (6).

Transmission to humans can occur via tick bites, direct contact with
blood or tissues of infected animals, person-to-person spread, or by
nosocomial infection (1).

One of the most striking questions about the geographical distribution
of CCHFv is the lack of viral detection in western Mediterranean, west
to the Balkans, which is currently the known western limit of the
virus (7). This is of special interest because _H. marginatum_, the
main tick vector in western Paleartic, is common throughout the
Mediterranean basin (7), where neither clinical cases of the disease
nor the virus have been reported. Unsupported claims on the effects of
climate on virus distribution have been reported but never empirically
demonstrated (8).

We report the detection of CCHFv in ticks collected in south-western
Europe. A total of 117 adult _H. lusitanicum_, were collected on 28
resident adult (older than 2 years) _Cervus elaphus_ [the red deer] on
15 Nov 2010, in the province of Caceres (Spain) in a site located at
39.63 deg N, 7.33 deg W. Ticks were transported alive to the
laboratory, [identified], and frozen at minus 80 deg C [minus 112 deg
F]. For RNA extraction, specimens were washed in 70 percent ethanol
solution followed by miliQ sterile water. Each tick was longitudinally
cut. One half was used for further processing and the other one,
stored until necessary. Each half was crushed in sterile conditions.
RNA was individually extracted using RNAeasy minikit (Quiagen, Hilden,
Germany), according to the manufacturer's instructions and frozen at
minus 80 deg C [minus 112 deg F]. The RNA was distributed in 12 pools
and retrotranscribed with Omniscript RT kit (Quiagen), according to
the manufacturer's instructions and frozen at minus 20 deg C [minus 4
deg F] for further use. Nested PCR assays were performed as previously
described by Midilli et al (9). Negative controls (with template DNA
but without primers and with primers and containing water instead of
template DNA) were included in all assays. For the 2nd round of PCRs,
2 out of 12 pools showed amplicons of the expected size (211 bp). Only
one could be sequenced and it was compared with representative
S-segment sequences of CCHFv available in GenBank using MEGA version
5.0. Aligned sequences are available upon request to the corresponding
author. Positive pools were submitted to the Spanish National Center
of Microbiology, where positivity was confirmed. The sequence reported
in this study showed 98 percent genetic similarity with those recorded
in Mauritania and Senegal, in the western coast of Africa.
Evolutionary relationships show that the strain from Spain lies among
the others sequences available for Africa.

This finding demonstrates the circulation of CCHFv in south-western
Europe. The close affinities with the strains circulating in countries
of western Africa and the lack of similarity with isolates from
eastern Europe suggest the introduction of the virus from near
northern Africa countries. Migratory movements of birds could explain
the presence of the virus in south-western Europe, since they are
common hosts of immature _H. marginatum_, reportedly introduced in
Europe through the annual migratory flights following the western
African coast (10). Trade movements of domestic or wild ungulates from
Eastern Europe do not support our finding because the lack of genetic
similarities among viral strains. We cannot state whether this virus
had been circulating before, or if other strains are present in the
area, because CCHFv detection in western Mediterranean was not
addressed before. _H. lusitanicum_ ticks exist as relatively isolated
populations in a narrow stripe ranging from Sicily to Portugal. The
main hosts for immature stages (Mediterranean rabbit) and adults
(ungulates) are residents in the collection area and trade movements
of animals have not been carried out since several years ago. This
tick could thus not act as a spreading vector in western
Mediterranean, and we should not exclude an ancient existence of the
virus, because it has been recorded in ticks restricted to hosts
unable to spread long distances. Additional data collected in the
Mediterranean basin are necessary to establish the actual range of the
virus.

[We thank Aysen Gargili, Marmara University, Istanbul (Turkey), for
help with methods. This study was partly supported by a grant from
Fondo de Investigacion Sanitaria, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacion,
Spain (PS09/02492)].

--
Jose A Oteo
Area de Enfermedades Infecciosas
Hospital San Pedro
C/Piqueras 98-7 N.E.
26006 Logrono (La Rioja), Spain
<jaoteo@riojasalud.es>


[The report above is a transcript of a manuscript as submitted for
publication and ProMED-mail thanks Professor Agustin Estrada-Pena for
permission to post this information in view of its importance as a
forewarning that Western Europe may be at risk of exposure to this
dangerous hemorrhagic fever. The full text with references will appear
in Emerging Infectious Diseases.

Caceres, in the autonomous community of Extremadura, can be located on
the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at
http://healthmap.org/r/1laG.

Images of _Hyalomma_ species ticks can be viewed at
http://webpages.lincoln.ac.uk/fruedisueli/FR-webpages/parasitology/Ticks/TIK/tick-key/hyalomma_adult.htm.

Fact sheets about CCHF can be accessed at
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/spb/mnpages/dispages/cchf.htm and
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs208/en/index.html. -
Mod.CP]
See Also
Crimean-Congo hem. fever, current situation - Europe 20100311.0793
.................................................cp/mj/dk
</body>
