<header id=052381>
Published Date: 2011-12-14 14:32:31 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Malaria: world malaria report 2010 released
Archive Number: 20111214.3596
</header>
<body id=052381>
MALARIA: WORLD MALARIA REPORT 2010 RELEASED
*******************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 14 Dec 2011
Source: Capital FM [edited]
http://www.capitalfm.co.ke/news/2011/12/who-655000-malaria-deaths-in-2010/


Malaria caused the deaths of an estimated 655 000 people last year
[2010], with 86 percent of victims children aged under 5, World Health
Organization figures showed on Tuesday [13 Dec 2011].

The figure marked a 5 percent drop in deaths from 2009. Africa
accounted for 91 percent of deaths and 81 percent of the 216 million
cases worldwide in 2010.

In its annual World Malaria Report for 2010, the WHO hailed as a
"major achievement" a 26 percent fall in mortality rates since 2000
despite being well short of its 50 percent target.

The UN health agency aims to eradicate malaria deaths altogether by
the end of 2015 and reduce the number of cases by 75 percent on 2000
levels. International funding for the fight against malaria peaked at
USD 2 billion (1.5 billion euros) this year [2011], but the WHO
estimates USD 5 billion will be needed each year until 2015 if its
targets are to be reached.

The cash has funded a big increase in the number of households with
insecticide-treated mosquito nets, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa,
where 50 percent now have the nets compared with just 3 percent in
2000. To finance the fight, the WHO suggested a tax on financial
transactions or the rolling out of a tax on airline journeys, which it
said if extended to other countries could generate significant extra
funds.

"Other country-specific schemes such as tourist taxes may offer
opportunities to raise funds for control programmes in malaria endemic
countries," the report said.

WHO director general Margaret Chan welcomed the "significant and
durable" progress in the fight against malaria but said parasite
resistance to drugs was causing concern in parts of Southeast Asia.

"Parasite resistance to antimalarial medicines remains a real and
ever-present danger to our continued success," said Chan. "There is an
urgent need to develop an Asia-wide framework to ensure sustained and
coordinated action against this public health threat." According to
the WHO, malaria is endemic in 106 countries and is currently
transmitted in 99 of them. Of the 99, 43 recorded a fall in reported
cases of more than 50 percent between 2000 and 2010.

Six countries account for 60 percent of deaths from Malaria: Nigeria,
Democratic Republic of Congo, Burkina Faso, Mozambique, Ivory Coast
and Mali. Europe had an estimated 176 cases of malaria in 2010 with no
reported deaths.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The press report refers to the release of the 2010 World Malaria
Report by the WHO. The report contains country specific data and can
be downloaded at
http://www.who.int/malaria/world_malaria_report_2010/en/index.html.
Also see the WHO Director General's press release at:
http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/2010/malaria_report_20101214/en/index.html.

The 2010 report has 2 main messages. Firstly, investment in malaria
control brings results. After so many years of deterioration and
stagnation in the malaria situation, countries and their development
partners are now on the offensive. Current strategies work. The
results set out in this report are the best seen in decades.

In Africa, the distribution of insecticide-treated mosquito nets has
increased dramatically. In less than 3 years, the number of nets
distributed has come tantalizingly close to the target of 350 million
set in 2008.

Many considered that target as impossibly ambitious. We are nearly
there through the largest scale-up of a malaria intervention in
Africa's history. Household surveys indicate that a very high
proportion of these nets are actually being used.

Also in Africa, the number of people protected by indoor residual
spraying of insecticides rose 6-fold, from less than 13 million in
2005 to 75 million in 2009.

Artemisinin-based combination therapies, or ACTs, are our most
effective antimalarial drugs. Worldwide, the number of ACT treatment
courses procured increased from just over 11 million in 2005 to 158
million in 2009.

Such massive increases in the delivery of interventions have brought
results. Worldwide, the estimated annual number of malaria deaths
dropped from nearly one million in 2000 to 781 000 in 2009.

Eleven of Africa's 43 endemic countries are now reporting reductions
of greater than 50 percent in either confirmed malaria cases or deaths
over the past decade.

Outside Africa, the malaria map is shrinking as more and more
countries eliminate malaria from their territory. Each country that
eliminates malaria benefits all others, but most especially its
immediate neighbors.

The 2nd main message is that progress on every front, at every level
is fragile.

Malaria is an extremely complex disease that has been causing deaths
and social disruption since the beginning of recorded human history.
This is a disease that can take full advantage of any lapse in
investment, vigilance, or control. - Mod.EP]

.................................................sb/ep/msp/dk
</body>
