<header id=031745>
Published Date: 2011-10-10 09:26:45 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Japanese encephalitis & other - India (26): (UP)
Archive Number: 20111010.3035
</header>
<body id=031745>
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (26): (UTTAR PRADESH)
*************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sun 9 Oct 2011
Source: Investors, United Press International (UPI) via COMTEX report
[edited]
http://www.investors.com/NewsAndAnalysis/Newsfeed/Article/136751807/201110092330/Encephalitis-kills-hundreds.aspx


Encephalitis, a deadly viral disease, has killed hundreds of people,
many of them children, in the past 2 months in India, health
authorities said. Gorakhpur in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh has
been the worst hit so far with more than 370 reported dead, NDTV
television channel reported Sunday [9 Oct 2011]. The broadcaster said
the disease appeared to be spreading outside the state with Delhi and
Chandigarh areas reporting similar cases.

CNN-IBN, quoting public health experts, reported that although the
water or mosquito-borne viral disease has been concentrated in the
eastern parts of Uttar Pradesh for years, claiming hundreds of lives
each year, the epidemic has been badly mismanaged as the state is one
of the poorest in the country.

The network said pediatric hospitals in the Gorakhpur area are unable
to handle the rush of encephalitis patients. "Every day we have to
cope with this situation and this has been going on for the last 2
months. The number of patients is so large we cannot cope with the
resources we have," said one pediatrician at the BRD Medical College
and Hospital. The network said the hundreds of patients admitted to
various hospitals are suffering either from the mosquito-borne
Japanese encephalitis or its water-borne strain [enteroviruses].

The situation is repeated year after year in the state during the
monsoon season and the epidemic has still not been contained, CNN-IBN
reported. The report said the state government has allocated more than
USD 5 million to handle the current crisis, but Dr RN Singh, who has
been fighting to eradicate the disease, says it is too little too
late. He says he is fed up as the issue has not yet been taken up as
an emergency on a national scale.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Reports of undetermined acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) cases in
northeastern India this year (2011) have suggested a relationship to
contaminated water perhaps due to enteroviruses. ProMED-mail
subscriber Ronan Kelly of FluTrackers <ronankelly@comcast.net>,
provided some helpful references that indicate the enterovirus and
other virus infections diagnosed in the recent past. It is unfortunate
that the viruses responsible for the many recent AES cases apparently
have not been identified in the recent reports that have come to
ProMED-mail.

References
----------
1. Sapkal GN, Bondre VP, Fulmali PV, et al: Enteroviruses in Patients
with Acute Encephalitis, Uttar Pradesh, India. 2009. Emerg Infect Dis.
2009; 15(2): 295-8;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2657625/
Abstract
--------
An outbreak of viral encephalitis occurred in northern India in 2006.
Attempts to identify an etiologic agent in cerebrospinal fluid by
using reverse transcription-PCR showed positivity to enterovirus (EV)
in 66 (22 per cent) of 306 patients. Sequencing and phylogenetic
analyses of PCR products from 59 (89 per cent) of 66 specimens showed
similarity with EV-89 and EV-76 sequences.

2. Beig FK, Malik A, Rizvi M, et al: Etiology and
clinico-epidemiological profile of acute viral encephalitis in
children of western Uttar Pradesh, India. Int J Infect Dis 2010;
14(2): 141-6;
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1201971209001945
Summary
-------
87 patients were enrolled in the study. The most common etiology of VE
was enterovirus 71 (42 per cent), followed by measles (21 per cent),
varicella zoster virus (16 per cent), herpes simplex virus (11 per
cent), and mumps (11 per cent). Japanese encephalitis virus was not
found in any case. Enterovirus 71 infection caused significant
morbidity in children; mortality occurred in 50 per cent. A
preponderance of cases occurred in December. In our study generalized
convulsions along with altered sensorium were the significant findings
in patients with VE. Enterovirus 71, the major etiology of VE in our
study, was associated with significant mortality and morbidity. Such
studies should be conducted frequently to assess the role of emerging
VE in different regions.

3. Kumar A, Shukla D, Kumar R, et al: An epidemic of encephalitis
associated with human enterovirus B in Uttar Pradesh, India, 2008. J
Clin Virol 2011; 51(2): 142-5;
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1386653211000989
Abstract
--------
Enterovirus RNA was detected in 37 (41 per cent) of 90 CSF samples by
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Seroneutralisation,
amplification, and sequencing of the 3'-end of the VP1 region of EV
isolates revealed coxsackievirus B5 (CBV) and echovirus 19 (ECV) as
the main serotypes causing this epidemic. Phylogenetic analysis showed
that sequence divergence among the same serotypes was 0-4 per cent at
the nucleotide level. This is the 1st report suggesting that CBV 5 and
ECV 19 may be responsible for an epidemic of encephalitis in India.
These serotypes were variant and evolved within the studied area.

An interactive HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map showing the
location of Uttar Pradesh state can be accessed at
http://healthmap.org/r/1iZ5. - Mod.TY]
See Also
Japanese encephalitis & other - India (25): (UP, BI) 20111006.3004
Japanese encephalitis & other - India (24): (UP) 20111004.2989
.................................................ty/mj/mpp
</body>
