<header id=049113>
Published Date: 2011-09-05 16:00:21 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Streptococcal endophthalmitis - USA: (FL,CA,TN), repackaging
Archive Number: 20110905.2711
</header>
<body id=049113>
STREPTOCOCCAL ENDOPHTHALMITIS - USA: (FLORDIA, CALIFORNIA, TENNESSEE),
REPACKAGING
**********************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Wed 31 Aug 2011
Source: New York Times [edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/31/health/31drug.html


At least 16 people in 2 states have gotten severe eye infections, and
some have been blinded, from injections of the drug Avastin, according
to health authorities and to lawyers representing the patients.

The cancer drug Avastin has been used by some doctors to treat macular
degeneration, an off-label application. The incidents, in Florida and
Tennessee, demonstrate the risks associated with the money-saving
practice of injecting Avastin into the eye to treat the wet form of
age-related macular degeneration, a common cause of severe vision loss
in the elderly.

Avastin, sold by Genentech, is approved to treat cancer, not eye
disease. But many retina specialists use Avastin off label because it
costs only about USD 50 an injection, compared with USD 2000 for
Lucentis, another Genentech drug that has the same mode of action and
is approved as an eye treatment. The off-label use of Avastin has
saved Medicare and patients hundreds of millions of dollars a year.
But dividing a vial of Avastin into numerous tiny doses for injection
into the eye introduces the risk of bacterial contamination. That is
apparently what has happened in the cases in Florida and Tennessee.

The FDA issued an alert late Tuesday [30 Aug 2011] saying that at
least 12 patients in Miami, treated at 3 clinics, had suffered eye
inflammations. While all had impaired eyesight to begin with, some
lost all remaining vision in the treated eye, the agency said.

The FDA said all the infections involved a single lot of Avastin and
had been traced to a single pharmacy in Hollywood, FL that had
repackaged the drug for use in the eye.

In Tennessee, 4 patients received shots contaminated by bacteria,
according to a statement provided to The Tennessean newspaper by the
Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, part of the USA Department of
Veterans Affairs. The Avastin doses were prepared in the pharmacy of
the VA hospital in Nashville.

One of the patients, a 77-year-old man, suffered an eye infection with
viridans streptococcus [a term for the general category of
alpha-hemolytic streptococci - Mod.LL] after an injection in late
March 2011 that spread to his brain. "He is permanently blinded,
permanently brain damaged," said his son, "He came in walking and
talking, and he remains in a vegetative state as we speak."

The Florida patients received their injections in early July 2011 and
were apparently infected with _Streptococcus oralis_ [one of the many
species of alpha-hemolytic streptococci - Mod.LL].

Last week, the FDA announced a recall of syringes containing Avastin
from Chroniscript, a part of Walgreens pharmacy in Miami. Jim Cohn, a
spokesman for Walgreens, said the syringes had been supplied to "a
limited number of physician offices in Miami-Dade and Broward
counties."

A 79-year-old man from Miami got an injection of Avastin into his
right eye on 8 Jul 2011. While there were no problems with the 7
previous injections of the drug, this one caused tremendous pain and
caused a white film to grow over his eye, according to his
representative. "There was a point in time where his eye was
completely white, without coloration, no pupil, no nothing," the
representative said. Among those mentioned in papers filed was
Infupharma, a compounding pharmacy that was said to have divided the
Avastin into tiny doses. It is not clear what the relationship was
between Infupharma and Chroniscript.

Infupharma said it would not discuss details because of the continuing
investigation and litigation. Genentech said it would not comment on
the litigation, but said that it had always cautioned against use of
Avastin in the eye.

"Avastin is not manufactured or approved and to date has not been
proven safe for use in the eye," a spokesman for the company said
Tuesday [30 Aug 2011]. While the company is being sued, it could
benefit overall if the incidents discourage use of Avastin in favor of
the far more lucrative Lucentis.

Eye doctors who use Avastin have played down concerns about the risk
of bacterial contamination. Dr. Philip Rosenfeld, a retina specialist
at the University of Miami who pioneered the use of Avastin for
macular degeneration, said the recent incidents apparently stemmed
from careless procedures by pharmacies and should not discourage the
use of the drug.

"It took 6 years for something like this to happen," he said, noting
that there have been more than 2 million injections of Avastin into
eyes in the USA alone since the practice began in 2005. A clinical
trial sponsored by the National Eye Institute found that Avastin and
Lucentis were equivalent in preserving or improving vision after a
year.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

*****
[2]
Date: Fri 2 Sep 2011
Source: New York Times [edited]
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/02/business/more-reports-of-avastin-causing-blindness.html


Five more patients who were being treated with the drug Avastin for
eye disease have been blinded, according to one of the patients and
medical professionals.

The latest cases occurred last month [August 2011] at the Veterans
Affairs Medical Center in Los Angeles. Late Thursday [1 Sep 2011], the
Department of Veterans Affairs confirmed that the problem had occurred
and said that an investigation into the matter was continuing.

In the cases in Los Angeles, no contaminant has been identified,
according to medical professionals and a patient involved. The 5
patients, who had macular degeneration, all received their injections
of Avastin on 12 Aug 2011 at the VA Sepulveda Ambulatory Care Center
in the San Fernando Valley.

The recent incidents could lead doctors and patients to use the far
more expensive Lucentis instead of Avastin. In its statement, Veterans
Affairs said that its Los Angeles medical center had suspended use of
Avastin for macular degeneration on 15 Aug 2011 and was now buying
Lucentis to resume therapy for the 30 to 40 treatments it administers
a week.

The cases are also likely to raise questions about so-called
compounding pharmacies, which prepare customized drugs for patients,
including doses of Avastin to treat eye problems.

The FDA has limited oversight of these pharmacies.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

*****
[3]
Date: Tue 30 Aug 2011
Source: FDA [edited]
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm270296.htm


The FDA is alerting health care professionals that repackaged
intravitreal injections of Avastin (bevacizumab) have caused a cluster
of serious eye infections in the Miami, Florida area. The Florida
Department of Health (DOH) notified FDA of a cluster of streptococcal
endophthalmitis infections in 3 clinics following intravitreal
injection of repackaged Avastin. Investigators traced the tainted
injections to a single pharmacy located in Hollywood, Florida. The
pharmacy repackaged the Avastin from sterile injectable 100 mg/4 mL,
single-use, preservative-free vials into individual one mL single-use
syringes.

The pharmacy then distributed the Avastin to multiple eye clinics for
use in treating patients. To date, FDA is aware of at least 12
patients in at least 3 of these clinics who had eye infection. While
all of these patients had visual deficits prior to their injections
with Avastin, some of these patients lost all remaining vision in that
eye due to the endophthalmitis.

The agency and Florida health officials continue to investigate the
cause of the infection. While the investigation is not yet complete,
the common link for the infections is the pharmacy that repackaged the
Avastin and the single lot of Avastin used in the re-packaging.

Health care professionals should be aware that repackaging sterile
drugs without proper aseptic technique can compromise product
sterility, potentially putting the patient at risk for microbial
infections. Health care professionals should ensure that drug products
are obtained from appropriate, reliable sources and properly
administered.

Avastin solution for intravenous infusion is approved for the
treatment of various types of cancers. Some physicians also prescribe
Avastin off-label for the treatment of wet age-related macular
degeneration, although Avastin is not currently approved for this
indication. Lucentis has been approved by the FDA for wet age-related
macular degeneration.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[It is curious that these 3 episodes have occurred in 2011 while the
practice of recompounding the drug has been occurring for 6 years. It
is possible that the packaging of the vial has changed, making
contamination easier to occur. That 2 of the 3 outbreaks were related
to alpha-hemolytic streptococci suggests the contamination of oral
microflora from an unclear mechanism.

Avastin (bevacizumab) and Lucentis (ranibizumab) are in a class of
medications called vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A)
antagonists, working by blocking abnormal blood vessel growth and
leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss in people with wet
age-related macular degeneration. Both are produced by Genentech, but
only the latter drug is packaged in doses appropriate for ocular use
at a cost to the consumer, or more likely to the 3rd party carrier, of
40 times. Res ipsa loquitur. - Mod.LL]

.................................................ll/msp/dk
</body>
