<header id=014110>
Published Date: 2011-07-31 16:45:34 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hantavirus update - Americas (33): USA, Chile
Archive Number: 20110731.2306
</header>
<body id=014110>
HANTAVIRUS UPDATE 2011 - AMERICAS (33): USA, CHILE
**************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] USA (Washington State]
[2] USA (New Mexico)
[3] Chile (Aysen)

******
[1] USA (Washington State)
Date: 21 Jul 2011
Source: KIMATY [summ. & edited]
http://www.kimatv.com/news/125967338.html


The Yakima Health District (YHD) has received confirmation from the
Washington State Department of Health (DOH) and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that the death earlier this month
[July 2011] of a Yakima County man in his 50s was caused by a
hantavirus. This is the 1st hantavirus death in Washington State since
2009 and the 1st case reported in the state for 2011. Because some
hantavirus infections are fatal in about one of every 3 cases, YHD is
encouraging residents to take simple precautions to prevent exposure
to this rare but life-threatening infection.

YHD Health Officer Dr. Christopher Spitters said: "We extend our
condolences to the family of this man. This rare and unfortunate event
that led to his demise is a reminder of the importance of taking steps
to maintain sanitation in general, to avoid rodent infestation in
particular, and to exercise caution when encountering or cleaning up
rodent-infested areas."

Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is caused by a virus found in the
urine, droppings, and saliva of some rodents.

In Washington State, the most common carriers are deer mice
[_Peromyscus maniculatus_]. HPS develops after breathing dust and
other particles stirred up from rodent droppings or nests. YHD's
investigation revealed that the deceased man did have risk factors for
rodent exposure, but the specific means by which he acquired it was
not determined.

Illness usually begins 1-6 weeks after exposure. Early signs include
fever, severe muscle aches, and fatigue. Some people may also have
headaches, dizziness, chills, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or stomach
pain. Commonly, healthcare providers confuse early stages of the
disease with influenza. If left untreated, coughing and shortness of
breath usually follow as the disease rapidly progresses, and the lungs
fill with fluid. On average, about one in 3 people die after
developing HPS, even persons in good health with the best in medical
care. Persons with exposure to rodent infested areas and experiencing
the above symptoms should consult their medical provider immediately.

HPS is a rare condition. Since its recognition in 1993, 41 cases have
been reported in Washington State, resulting in 13 deaths [32 per cent
mortality]. Each year, Washington State has 1-5 confirmed hantavirus
[infection] cases. Most of these cases occur in Eastern Washington.
Yakima County has had 4 previous confirmed cases since 1993, the most
recent of those in 2006.

Anyone who comes into contact with rodents that carry [some]
hantavirus[es] is at risk of HPS. Residents are reminded that any
activity that puts you in contact with rodents and their environment
directly, particularly rodent droppings, urine, saliva, or nesting
areas, poses risk. This may include opening up or cleaning cabins,
RV's, sheds, garages, cellars, and barns. These areas could
potentially be contaminated with the virus that causes HPS.

It is important to take the proper steps to prevent exposure to
hantavirus. The Yakima Health District recommends doing the following
when cleaning areas which may have been inhabited by rodents: Open all
doors and windows for at least 30 minutes before cleaning. Wear gloves
and a mask to protect from exposure. DO NOT use vacuums, brooms,
dusters or anything else that can stir up contaminated dust.
Thoroughly wet contaminated areas with a household disinfectant or
bleach solution (1 cup of bleach per gallon of water). Let soak for at
least 10 minutes. Using a damp towel, clean up the material, then mop
or sponge the area with bleach solution or household disinfectant.
Spray dead rodents, nesting materials and feces with disinfectant
until soaked, and double-bag along with all cleaning materials, and
dispose of appropriately for your area. Disinfect gloves before taking
them off, and thoroughly wash hands afterwards.

While these steps will minimize the risk of exposure, the best way to
prevent HPS is to keep rodents out of areas in which people work and
live. Check your home for gaps and holes, especially around pipes,
vents, and under doors. Gaps bigger than the diameter of a dime are
large enough for a mouse to pass through, so ensure all gaps and holes
are minimized and/or properly sealed. Remove potential food sources in
the home by making sure food is properly sealed, spilled food is
cleaned up right away, pet food is put away after use, and garbage is
in plastic or metal containers with tight lids. Reduce food sources
and nesting areas outside the home by cleaning up trash, controlling
weeds, keeping grains and animal feed in plastic or metal containers
with a tight lid, and moving wood piles at least 100-feet away from
the home.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The hantavirus involved in this case is not specified but most likely
is Sin Nombre virus. Not all hantaviruses cause HPS in humans.

An image of _Peromyscus maniculatus_, the rodent host of Sin Nombre
virus, can be accessed at
http://share3.esd105.wednet.edu/rsandelin/Fieldguide/Animalpages/Mammals/Land%20mammals.htm#Deer_mouse.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Yakima County,
Washington state USA can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/15Nw.
- Mod.TY]

******
[2] USA (New Mexico)
Date: 25 Jul 2011
Source: News West 9 [edited]
http://www.newswest9.com/story/15144514/mckinley-county-man-dies-from-hantavirus


State health officials say a 23-year-old man from McKinley County has
died from hantavirus pulmonary syndrome.

The New Mexico Health Department said Monday [25 Jul 2011] that this
is the 4th hantavirus case reported in the state this year [2011].

Hantavirus is contracted by breathing particles of rodent droppings,
urine or saliva.

There's no specific treatment for hantavirus, but officials say the
chances for recovery are better with early medical attention.

The earlier cases this year [2011] consist of a 39-year-old McKinley
County man who recovered from the illness and a 51-year-old McKinley
County woman and a 35-year-old Torrance County man who both died from
hantavirus.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[As in the Washington State report, the hantavirus involved in this
case is not specified but most likely is Sin Nombre virus.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of McKinley County,
New Mexico USA can be accessed at
http://healthmap.org/r/0n*8http://healthmap.org/r/0n*8>. - Mod.TY]

******
[3] Chile (Aysen)
Date: Thu 28 Jul 2011
Source: El Diario de Aysen [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited]
http://www.diarioaysen.cl/noticias1.php?id=1463


According to Health SEREMI Claudio Vallejos, on Wednesday night [27
Jul 2011], a 71-year-old woman from the El Saldo area, between Aysen
and Chacabuco, died in the Coyhaique Regional Hospital after
presenting with a complex clinical picture for several days. The
examinations carried out on the patient in the hospital led to the
suspicion that she had a hantavirus infection.

In order to corroborate the preliminary diagnosis of a hantavirus
infection, health authorities sent medical samples to the Public
Health Institute in Santiago to carry out tests to confirm or discard
the [etiology of] the disease. Results will be ready this weekend
[30-31 Jul 2011].

The Health SEREMI indicated that a sanitary alert was activated 3
weeks ago in the Aysen region and Palena province due to the massive
presence of rodents. A confirmed hantavirus infection case was
released from hospital and is recuperating satisfactorily. Another
suspected case has been discarded.

It is worth remembering that preventive measures to deal with this
phenomenon are essential, such as good hygiene and keeping rodents
away. Maintain clean houses and patios, keep grass mown short, and
keep trash in hermetically sealed containers.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Although not specified, the most likely hantavirus involved in this
case is Andes virus.

An image of the long-tailed pygmy rice rat (_Oligoryzomys
longicaudatus_), the sigmodontine rodent host of Andes hantavirus, can
be seen at http://www.bios.niu.edu/frayjorge/rod6.jpg.

The regions of Chile can be seen on the map at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_divisions_of_Chile. A
HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of the Aysen region can
be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/15Nx. - Mod.TY]
See Also
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (31): Chile 20110710.2082
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (27) USA (NM) 20110527.1625
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (26): Chile, Argentina, USA 20110523.1562
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (23): USA, Chile 20110422.1265
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (13): USA (OR) 20110315.0827
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (05): USA (NM) 20110124.0289
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas: Chile, USA 20110106.0077
.................................................dk/ty/msp/dk
</body>
