<header id=009738>
Published Date: 2011-09-27 07:49:11 EDT
Subject: PRO> Undiagnosed debilitating illness - China (03): AIDS phobia
Archive Number: 20110927.2927
</header>
<body id=009738>
UNDIAGNOSED DEBILITATING ILLNESS - CHINA (03): ACQUIRED
IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME PHOBIA
****************************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Sat 7 May 2011
Source: China Daily [edited]
http://www.china.org.cn/china/2011-05/07/content_22514610.htm


Studies solve mystery of 'HIV-negative AIDS'
--------------------------------------------
The 60 people who had claimed they were suffering from a mysterious
infectious condition dubbed "HIV-negative AIDS" [human
immunodeficiency virus-negative acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]
have been cleared of the disease, but 48 of them tested positive for
several types of pathogens.

The research was done by a team of the No 1 Affiliated Hospital of the
Guangzhou Medical University and the State Key Laboratory of
Respiratory Disease, between 31 Mar and 3 May 2011. 60 patients,
including 52 males, whose average age was 34.2 and who came from 16
provinces and municipalities, were examined, said Zhong Nanshan,
director of the Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Diseases, who
directed the research.

The sufferers had shown symptoms for periods ranging from 3 months to
10 years. Among the 48 who tested positive for pathogens, 33 tested
positive for epidermolysis bullosa, 12 positive for _Chlamydia
trachomatis_ (CT), 9 for _Ureaplasma urealyticum_ (UU), 7 for
_Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ (NG), 8 for cytomegalovirus [infection] and
one for herpes simplex virus [infection]. 16 tested positive for more
than one of those pathogens, which are mostly related to sexually
transmitted diseases.

In the 24 examined for knee diseases, 10 showed abnormalities in their
knees, and in the 38 examined for eye diseases, 20 were diagnosed with
conventional eye diseases. 12 underwent psychological tests and 7 were
found abnormal.

Since 2009, media reports have stated that sufferers had displayed
symptoms very similar to AIDS, such as swollen lymph nodes,
subcutaneous bleeding, joint pain, fatigue, night sweats, and
emaciation. The Ministry of Health stated in April [2011] that there
was no evidence that those people were infected by the AIDS virus.

Wu Zunyou, an AIDS expert with the Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, said no new viruses had been found among the alleged
sufferers and they were most likely just suffering from a mental
health problem often called AIDS phobia.

There is no fundamental difference between results of the research led
by Zhong Nanshan and that by the Ministry of Health, said Hao Yang,
deputy director of the bureau of disease prevention and control at the
ministry, on Friday [6 May 2011]. Zhong Nanshan said his team agreed
with the ministry on the conclusions based on its research. Many of
the people involved in Zhong's research had indulged in highly risky
sexual behavior before showing the symptoms. Most of the pathogens
were not detected with routine tests but with the more advanced
fluorescent PCR tests, Zhong said. Some sufferers had not received
sufficient treatment before the research. With the number of AIDS
cases increasing in China, the phobia over the disease has heightened,
which has frustrated clinical treatments, Zhong said.

A patient in the research project, said he had never thought he was
infected with HIV but had been wrongly labeled as an HIV-negative AIDS
or AIDS phobia sufferer. He said he was grateful for the research that
confirmed he suffers from _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_.

--
Communicated by:
Ronan Kelly
for FluTrackers.com
<ronankelly@comcast.net>

******
[2]
Date: Tue 10 May 2011
Source: Xinhua News Agency [edited]
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-05/10/c_13867976.htm


No new virus found in China 'HIV-negative AIDS' group: ministry
--------------------------------------------------------------
A spokesman with China's Ministry of Health (MOH) said Tuesday [10 May
2011] that no new or unknown viruses has been found so far in the
country's self-proclaimed "HIV-negative AIDS" group, and the cause of
their AIDS-like symptoms had yet to be determined. The statement,
according to Ministry spokesman Deng Haihua, was based on tests by
domestic and overseas authoritative facilities.

The "HIV-negative AIDS patients" said they had displayed symptoms very
similar to AIDS, such as swollen lymph nodes, subcutaneous bleeding,
joint pain, fatigue, night sweating, and loss of weight. They termed
it "HIV-negative AIDS," thinking they might have been suffering from a
mutation of the AIDS virus, or a new unknown virus. On Tuesday [10 May
2011], Deng, citing the latest test on 60 such "patients," said no
evidence suggested they were suffering from an [that is, the same]
infectious disease. The new tests, conducted by a team led by Zhong
Nanshan, a renowned medical expert, showed that these people had not
been infected with the HIV virus. The MOH first received reports of
"HIV-negative AIDS" in June 2009.

However, Zhong's tests found the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a very
common virus of the herpes virus family, in 55 percent of the
patients, according to Deng. "Further research needs to be conducted
in order to determine whether the EBV is the cause of the group's
symptoms," Deng said. While some medical experts believe that the
"patients" might suffer from some kind of psychological AIDS phobia,
others said the possibility of finding a new virus in the future could
not be ruled out.

--
Communicated by:
Ronan Kelly
for FluTrackers.com
<ronankelly@comcast.net>

[ProMED-mail thanks Ronan Kelly for drawing attention to these 2
reports which appear to have resolved this controversy. FluTrackers
has maintained a thread with other corroborating reports at
http://www.flutrackers.com/forum/showthread.php?p=405397. -
Mod.CP]

[The reports were published in May and we are sorry we did not become
aware of them earlier. - Mod.LM]
See Also
Undiagnosed debilitating illness - China (02) 20110409.1108
Undiagnosed debilitating illness - China: RFI 20110404.1051
.................................................cp/mj/lm
</body>
