<header id=050502>
Published Date: 2008-08-11 16:00:29 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (06): letters, evidence
Archive Number: 20080811.2488
</header>
<body id=050502>
ANTHRAX, HUMAN, 2001 - USA (06): LETTERS, EVIDENCE
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: 8 Aug 2008
Source: BWPP Website [edited]
<http://www.bwpp.org//cgi-bin/forum/post_download.pl?pid=13981>


On 6 Aug 2008 the Department of Justice held a press conference on
the Amerithrax investigation at which the United States District
Attorney who led the event described the evidence that had led them
to conclude that Bruce Ivins, alone, was responsible for the anthrax
attacks [1]. The District Attorney agreed that much of that evidence
is circumstantial, but he presented one critical hard fact that has
recently emerged thanks to rapid and remarkable scientific advances:
the anthrax in the letters can be traced to a single flask of spores
with unique properties, created and maintained by Dr. Ivins at the US
Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID).
"This means that the spores used in the attacks were taken from that
specific flask, regrown, purified, dried and loaded into the
letters," said the District Attorney.

There are, however, 2 major gaps in the evidence he laid out, aside
from the uncertainty resulting from the inability of the FBI to bring
an indictment and prosecute the case because of the death of the
suspect.

First is the question of access to the stock of spores in the flask,
which was available to at least 10 scientific colleagues of Dr. Ivins'
at USAMRIID and possibly to quite a few more, including visitors from
other institutions and workers at laboratories in Ohio and New Mexico
that had received samples from the USAMRIID flask [2]. Laxity about
access, transfers and record-keeping on biological agents was once
commonplace at USAMRIID [3].

The 2nd major gap is the question of how the letter spores had been
processed. Colleagues have expressed doubt that Ivins had the
technical capability to make the letter anthrax [4]. The FBI has only
said that Dr. Ivins had access to a sophisticated lyophilizer for
drying spores [5]. The FBI's implicit assumption is that the letter
anthrax consisted simply of dry spores with no additives or further
treatment.

The FBI dealt with the issue of the letter spores' processing in an
article in the scientific journal Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, submitted in April 2006 and published in the journal's
August 2006 issue [6]. The article implied that the anthrax in the
letters was a simple spore preparation requiring no special expertise
or access. A follow-up article in the Washington Post [7] -- based on
the scientific article and interviews with FBI officials, "law
enforcement authorities" and "scientists"-- brought this impression
to public notice [8]. Specifically, questions were raised about
whether the anthrax in the Senate letters of 2001 was "weaponized"
and whether special knowledge and expertise were required to prepare
it. If these earlier surmises were wrong, then -- as the Washington
Post noted -- the number of possible persons of interest in the case
would expand. By the end of 2006, the notion that the anthrax mailer
needed no special knowledge had become the accepted wisdom.

What the Washington Post called "the most expansive public comment on
the nature of the powder [in the anthrax letters] by any FBI
official" is contained in just one paragraph (reprinted and discussed
here in the Annex below) from the Discussion section of the journal
article authored by Douglas J. Beecher of the FBI laboratory in
Quantico, VA. The article, which is entitled "Forensic application of
microbiological culture analysis to identify mail intentionally
contaminated with _Bacillus anthracis_ spores," is otherwise a simple
technical description of the procedures used to search bags of
Congressional mail for possible additional anthrax letters, after a
letter containing anthrax had been received by Senator Daschle's
office. The article contains no data about the origin, preparation or
composition of the anthrax in the Senate letters. A military analyst
who works with the FBI commented that the paragraph in question
"clearly had nothing to do with the content of the article" [9].

Dr. Beecher refused to comment on the article, referring the Press to
the FBI office leading the anthrax investigation; that office also
refused comment and would not allow Beecher to be interviewed [10].
However, the Editor-in-Chief of the journal, L. Nicholas Ornston,
told Chemical and Engineering News that "the statement should have
had a reference; an unsupported sentence being cited as fact is
uncomfortable to me. Any statement in a scientific article should be
supported by a reference or by documentation" [11].

Subsequently, a Letter to the Editor [12] appeared in the August 2007
issue of Applied and Environmental Microbiology, one year after the
Beecher article. The letter, entitled "Unsupported Conclusions on the
_Bacillus anthracis_ Spores," was signed by Dr. Kay A. Mereish, Chief
of Biological Planning and Operations at the UN Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), the unit that
inspected Iraq for biological weapons in 2002-2003. The letter had
been submitted on 14 Dec 2006. After hearing nothing from the journal
for 3 months, Dr. Mereish questioned the Editor of the journal, who
wrote back that he had been waiting for Beecher, the author of the
FBI's article, to provide a response. It is journal policy to print
the author's response to any criticism received. Although the Editor
said that he expected to have the matter finalized in a few more
days, publication of the letter was further delayed by months. The
Editor finally gave up and decided to publish the letter alone,
writing Mereish that Beecher did not provide a response [13].

Mereish's Letter to the Editor said that "the data supplied in the
[Beecher] paper could not be used as evidence for judging the quality
of the spores or to support or dismiss conceptions about the presence
or absence of spore additives or about the production engineering
used to prepare the spores. Furthermore, ...[the data presented]
could not be used for extrapolation of ideas concerning spore quality
or the method of production."

Mereish then cited a knowledgeable source who said that, contrary to
the implication in Beecher's article, the letter anthrax did contain
an additive. "In a meeting I attended in September 2006," she wrote,
"a presentation was made by a scientist who had worked on samples of
anthrax collected from letters involved in the same incident [as that
studied by Beecher] in October 2001; that scientist described the
anthrax spore as uncoated but said that it contained an additive that
affected the spore's electrical charges (D. Small, CBRN
Counter-Proliferation and Response, Paris, France, 18-20 Sep 2006;
organized by SMi
[<http://www.smi-online.co.uk>])"
[14]. Dr. Mereish said the anthrax work referred to at the meeting
was done under government contract [15].

During the 7 years since the anthrax attacks, diametrically opposing
descriptions of almost every aspect of the letter anthrax have at one
time or another been attributed directly or indirectly to FBI
investigators, along with correspondingly discordant assessments of
the necessary qualifications of the perpetrator. However, the FBI
maintains that they "have never been under any misconceptions about
the character of the anthrax used in the attacks. ... While there may
have been erroneous media reports about the character of the 2001
anthrax, the FBI's investigation has never been guided by such
reports" [16]. This is probably a true statement. It would not be in
the national interest to publicize a full and accurate description of
what was obviously an anthrax preparation that was highly effective
as a weapon. Accordingly, efforts to cover up some early slips that
were made to the media have been apparent to the observant eye. For
example, on 29 Oct 2001, Maj. Gen. John S. Parker, Commander of Fort
Detrick (who retired soon thereafter), stated that "there is silica
in the samples" [17]. He testified 2 days later that USAMRIID had at
first reported to the FBI that the Daschle letter anthrax had some
attributes consistent with "weaponized" anthrax; but then "revisited
the term 'weaponized' and decided the terms 'professionally done' and
'energetic' as more appropriate descriptions in lieu of any real
familiarity with weaponized materials" [18].

The chief FBI scientist, Dwight Adams, briefed Senators Daschle and
Leahy in late 2002, telling them that the letter anthrax contained no
additives [19]. Some years later, Adams admitted in a sworn
deposition on 11 Jan 2006 that scientific information obtained by the
FBI about the letter anthrax is too sensitive to reveal to either the
public or the Senate, Congress or their staff [20].

Like Adams' 2002 briefing, the FBI's scientific article also seems to
imply that the letter anthrax was produced without using additives or
sophisticated engineering (i.e., the anthrax was not "weaponized")
but was, instead, a simple spore preparation. The Washington Post
article about the FBI's scientific publication defined "weaponized"
to mean "specially treated or processed to allow them to disperse
more easily" [21]. It is well-established that the anthrax spores in
the letters dispersed very easily, contaminating the AMI building in
Florida and the Senate Hart office building when the letters were
opened [22], and passing through the pores of the paper envelopes to
contaminate postal buildings where the letters were handled. As Dr.
Anthony S. Fauci, Director of the National Institute for Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, pointed out early on, "you can call it [the
letter anthrax] whatever you want to call it with regard to grade and
size or weaponized or not weaponized. The fact is, it is acting like
a highly efficient bioterrorist agent" [23].

Whether a highly efficient bioterrorist agent could be made without
special knowledge and expertise is questionable and, hopefully,
wrong. In November 2002, the FBI asked the DOD laboratory at Dugway
to try to "reverse engineer" the mailed anthrax on the basis of
various hypotheses [24]. When the work was complete Michael Mason,
then the director of the FBI's anthrax investigation, acknowledged
that the effort to reverse engineer the letter anthrax had failed,
although it had helped investigators "narrow" some aspects of the
investigation and convinced them that the culprit had special
expertise [25].

Dugway, the Army laboratory that conducted the reverse engineering
experiments, is the only US laboratory known to have "weaponized"
anthrax [26]. Dugway also made the bacterial spore preparation that
was given to the Canadian military for use as an anthrax simulant to
demonstrate the consequences of opening an envelope containing
anthrax [27]. An outside investigator has written that the
preparation given Canada contained an unidentified additive and a
type of silica, and had been additionally treated or processed in
some (presumably classified) way at Dugway [28].

In April 2002, it was reported that an unusual chemical, unlike any
chemicals that had been used by the US or other countries in
biological weapons, was found in the letter anthrax, according to
"law enforcement officials" [29] and "a high-ranking government
official" [30]. The unusual chemical may be "polymerized glass,"
based on information obtained in 2003 from "biowarfare specialists
who work for the governments of 2 NATO countries," who had been
briefed on this by "US intelligence officers" [31]. The sources "said
they had never heard of polymerized glass before" [32]. On 5 Aug
2008, Richard Spertzel, the former head of the biological weapons
section of UNSCOM from 1994-99 and a member of the Iraq Survey Group,
wrote that: "Apparently, the spores were coated with a polyglass,
which tightly bound hydrophilic silica to each particle. That's what
was briefed (according to one of my former weapons inspectors at the
United Nations Special Commission) by the FBI to the German Foreign
Ministry at the time" [33].

The available evidence suggests that some form of sophisticated
treatment or processing requiring special knowledge and expertise was
necessary to make the highly dispersible anthrax spores in the
letters. If so, the letter anthrax was "weaponized," according to the
Washington Post's definition (specially treated or processed for
dispersion).

The letter anthrax did prove to be a potent weapon. If it was
comprised simply of spores, the Army's Dugway laboratory would surely
have been able to prove that by producing an identical sample. If
they had done so, it is doubtful that the FBI would have been anxious
to make that information public, for the edification of future
terrorists. The FBI's scientific paper is therefore more likely to be
a rollback effort than a change of opinion [34].

Footnotes

1: Transcript of the Amerithrax Investigation Press Conference,
<http://www.usdoj.gov/opa/pr/2008/August/08-opa-697.html>

2: New York Times, "Pressure Grows for F.B.I. to Show Anthrax
Evidence," August 4, 2008.

3: Washington Post, "'No One Asked Questions': Scientists Recount
U.S. Biodefense Labs' Security Lapses," February 19, 2002; Hartford
Courant, "Anthrax Easy to Get Out of Lab: Security Was Based on Trust
in Scientists," December 20, 2001.

4: Washington Post, "Anthrax Suspect Known for Quiet Research, Odd
Behavior," August 1, 2008.

5: Transcript of the Amerithrax Investigation Press Conference, and
appended documents (see footnote 1). Although a lyophilizer was not
needed for preparing samples for vaccine testing, it was used in
another project Ivins had conducted for DARPA (Washington Post,
"Anthrax Dryer a Key To Probe: Suspect Borrowed Device From Lab,"
August 5, 2008).

6: Douglas J. Beecher, "Forensic application of microbiological
culture analysis to identify mail intentionally contaminated with
Bacillus anthracis spores," Applied and Environmental Microbiology 72
5304, August 2006.

7: Washington Post, "FBI is Casting a Wider Net in Anthrax Attacks,"
September 25, 2006.

8: The Washington Post article was picked up and echoed by news media
around the country, coming as it did at the fifth anniversary of the
anthrax letters: see, for example, Washington Times, "FBI hit for
anthrax 'dead-ends'", October 25, 2006; International Herald Tribune
(AP), "FBI denies it misunderstood the quality of the anthrax used in
2001 attacks in US," September 28, 2006; South Florida Sun-Sentinel,
years after anthrax attacks, are we any safer? Terrorist attacks
remain a mystery," October 1, 2006; Frederick News-Post, "5 years
later, and few answers in anthrax probe," October 4, 2006; Palm Beach
Post, "Anthrax attacks fodder for rumors," October 5, 2006.

9: Chemical and Engineering News, "Anthrax Sleuthing: Science aids a
nettlesome FBI criminal probe," December 4, 2006.

10: Hartford Courant, "New Anthrax Theory Offered: FBI Scientist Says
Little Expertise Needed," September 22, 2006;Washington Post,
September 25, 2006, op.cit.; New York Times, "Anthrax Not Weapons
Grade, Official Says," September 26, 2006.

11: Chemical and Engineering News, December 4, 2006, op.cit.

12: K. Mereish, Letter to the Editor: "Unsupported Conclusions on the
Bacillus anthracis Spores," Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73
5074, August 2007.
<http://aem.asm.org/cgi/content/full/73/15/5074>.

13: Interview of Dr. Kay Mereish about publication of her Letter to
the Editor of Applied and Environmental Microbiology.

14: K. Mereish, Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73 5074,
August 2007, op. cit.

15: Interview of Dr. Kay Mereish about her Letter to the Editor.

16: Assistant FBI Director Eleni P. Kalish, letter to Congressman
Rush Holt, September 28, 2006, quoted in Rep. Rush Holt's letter to
S. Reyes, Chairman of the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence,
March 2, 2007, and also in an AP article in the International Herald
Tribune, "FBI denies it misunderstood the quality of anthrax used in
2001 attacks in US," September 28, 2006.

17: Major General John S. Parker, Commander of Fort Detrick and of
the US Military Research and Materiel Command, transcript of White
House Press Briefing by Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge et al,
11:52 am EST, October 29, 2001; San Francisco Chronicle, "Silica
grains detected in anthrax letter are tiny clues," October 30, 2001.
The Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP) carried out and
reported on the analysis (The AFIP Letter, August/October 2002
(<http://www.afip.org/cgi-bin/whatsnew.cgi/current.html article #115>);
see also Washington Post, "A Terrorist's Fragile Footprint: Letter's
Anthrax Spores Pose Many Obstacles to Analysis," November 29, 2001).
There was no mistaking the presence of silicon, said the Chief of
AFIP's Chemical Pathology Division (quoted in G. Matsumoto, Science,
"Anthrax Powder: State of the Art?," November 28, 2003).

18: Maj. Gen. John S. Parker, testimony to the Senate Committee on
Governmental Affairs and the Subcommittee on International Security,
Proliferation and Federal Service, "Terrorism Through the Mail:
Protecting the Postal Workers and the Public," October 31, 2001.

19: Information about the briefing was later reported by Matsumoto,
who obtained it from "sources on Capitol Hill" (Matsumoto, Science,
November 28, 2003, op. cit.). This may have been the leak from
"Congressional sources" referred to by the Assistant Director of the
FBI's Office of Congressional Affairs, in refusing to provide a
classified briefing to Congress on the progress of the anthrax
investigation (letter from Eleni P. Kalisch to Rep. Rush Holt,
September 28, 2006, quoted in Rep. Holt's letter to S. Reyes,
Chairman of the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, March 2,
2007
(<http://holt.house.gov/pdf/hearing_Request_Letters.pdf>).
That the Matsumoto Science article referenced above was of concern to
the FBI is clear from the deposition of FBI Lead Investigator Richard
Lambert in the Hatfill vs Ashcroft, DOJ, FBI et al. lawsuit on August
3, 2005 (Exhibit A in document 121 of the Docket, accessible at
<http://www.anthraxinvestigation.com/Docket.html>).

20: Dwight E. Adams, Deposition made in the Hatfill vs Ashcroft et
al. lawsuit, under questioning by Hatfill's lawyer Thomas Connolly,
January 11, 2006
(<http://www.anthraxinvestigation.com/Update-History2006.html>,
scroll down to questioning of Adams). The full name of the lawsuit is
Hatfill vs John Ashcroft, US Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Timothy Beres [DOJ employee], Daryl Darnell [DOJ
employee], Van Harp [FBI supervisory Special Agent], and All Unknown
Agents/Employees, Case # 1:03-cv-01793-RBW, filed 8/26/2003 in US
District Court, District of Columbia, assigned to Judge Reggie B.
Walton. The Docket and some documents can be accessed at
<http://www.anthraxinvestigation.com/Docket.html>.

21: Washington Post, September 26, 2007, op. cit.

22: The letters contained only a minute amount of anthrax (0.871
grams in the Leahy letter): New York Times, "Anthrax Sent Through
Mail Gained Potency by the Letter," May 7, 2002.

23: New York Times, "More Checked for Anthrax; US Officials
Acknowledge Underestimating Mail Risks," October 25, 2001.

24: New York Times, "Threats and Responses: Bioterrorism; Director
says FBI Is Trying To Recreate the Deadly Anthrax, November 2, 2002.

25: USA Today, "FBI fails to re-create anthrax production," September
29, 2003. Previously, in April 2003, after some of the "reverse
engineering" trials had taken place, it had been reported (according
to "government sources") that a spore preparation without a
"coating," made using simple methods, inexpensive equipment and
limited expertise, had matched the letter anthrax "closely enough,"
but it was not of the same high purity and small particle size
(Baltimore Sun, "Tests point to domestic source behind anthrax letter
attacks: Army reproductions hurt theories of foreign culprit," April
11, 2003).

26: Baltimore Sun, "Army confirms making anthrax in recent years:
Military laboratory in Utah says powder is all accounted for,"
December 13, 2001; New York Times, "US Recently Produced Anthrax in a
Highly Lethal Powder Form," December 13, 2001.

27: The Canadian study was conducted early in 2001 and was made known
to US military and some other Federal officials months before the
anthrax attacks occurred: Defense Research Establishment Suffield
(Canada), Risk Assessment of Anthrax Threat Letters, Technical Report
DRES TR-2001-048, September 2001; Washington Post, "Agency With Most
Need Didn't Get Anthrax Data: CDC Unaware of Canadian Study Before
Attacks," February 11, 2002.

28: G. Matsumoto, Science, November 28, 2003, op. cit.

29: Washington Post, "Powder Used in Anthrax Attacks 'Was Not
Routine,'" April 9, 2002.

30: CNN.com, "Official: Unusual coating in anthrax mailings," posted
7:55 am EDT, April 11, 2002.

31: G. Matsumoto, Science, November 28, 2003, op. cit. "Polymerized
glass" is a silane or siloxane compound. Matsumoto claims to have
information that both polymerized glass and silica are present in the
letter anthrax.

32: Ibid.

33: Richard Spertzel, "Bruce Ivins Wasn't the Anthrax Culprit," Wall
Street Journal, August 5, 2008.

34: On September 18, 2006, Michael Chertoff, Homeland Security
Secretary, said about the Amerithrax investigation: "There are times
that we may know a lot about a crime or an event that occurred, but
we may not have the admissible evidence that we need to prove it in
court" (CBS News, "Anthrax Investigation a Cold Case?," September 18,
2006).

ANNEX

The paragraph in the FBI's scientific paper of August 2006 that has
drawn notice is the following:

"Individuals familiar with the compositions of the powders in the
letters have indicated that they were comprised simply of spores
purified to different extents [reference given here by Beecher to an
article by Matsumoto [35]]. However, a widely circulated misconception
is that the spores were produced using additives and sophisticated
engineering supposedly akin to military weapon production. This idea
is usually the basis for implying that the powders were inordinately
dangerous compared to spores alone [5 references]. The persistent
credence given to this impression fosters erroneous preconceptions,
which may misguide research and preparedness efforts and generally
detract from the magnitude of hazards posed by simple spore
preparations."

When examined closely, the wording of this paragraph can be seen to
be amenable to multiple interpretations, unlike the straightforward
wording of the rest of the article. Some questions concerning the
interpretation of the paragraph are discussed below:

1st sentence in the paragraph: There are probably very few
individuals familiar with the compositions of the powders. Not all of
them agreed, prior to the DOJ's Press Conference of 7 Aug 2008, that
the powders were comprised simply of spores. Do they now?

2nd sentence: Its meaning is contingent upon what is meant by the
modifying phrase "supposedly akin to military production." Does it
mean that it is a misconception to suppose that the letter spores
were produced by the methods used in the old US biological weapons
program before it was abolished in 1969, or in the Soviet program?

Or does the phrase include methods used currently for risk assessment
in the US biodefense program (what if the letter spores were a
"diabolical advance in biological weapons technology," a belief
Matsumoto (op. cit.) attributed to an FBI faction)? In at least one
sense, the Senate anthrax is known to have been produced with more
sophisticated engineering than that used in US military production,
for which the spores were milled [36].

3rd Sentence: It is true that the references given (except for the
Matsumoto paper (op. cit.), which is referenced again in the critical
paragraph) simply assume, without discussion, that the letter anthrax
was a sophisticated preparation and therefore more dangerous than
spores alone. But the FBI article does not show that this assumption
is wrong.

4th sentence: This sentence simply says that it would be erroneous to
assume, when developing safety and security precautions, that simple
spore preparations are not dangerous. Following the 4th sentence
there is a paragraph that gives examples, with references, of the
hazards of ultra-simple dried microbial cultures and infected mouse
tissue (none of which, in fact, contained anthrax).

Annex Footnotes

35: G. Matsumoto, "Anthrax Powder: State of the Art?" Science,
November 28, 2003. This article actually says that there are 2
opposing schools of thought at the FBI regarding the sophistication
of the letter anthrax, and goes on to argue in detail that the spore
preparation in the Senate letters was NOT comprised simply of spores
but was complex and included additives.

36: Washington Post, "FBI's Theory On Anthrax Is Doubted: Attacks Not
Likely Work of 1 Person, Experts Say," October 28, 2002; G.
Matsumoto, November 28, 2003, op. cit.). Milling breaks some of the
spores, destroying their infectivity. It has been known since
December 2001 that the Daschle anthrax was not milled, because it did
not contain significant debris from broken spores (Washington Post,
"A Terrorist's Fragile Footprint: Letter's Anthrax Spores Pose Many
Obstacles to Analysis," November 29, 2001; Maj. Gen. John S. Parker,
testimony to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the
Subcommittee on International Security, Proliferation and Federal
Service, "Terrorism Through the Mail: Protecting the Postal Workers
and the Public," October 31, 2001; Dr. Ken Alibek, verbal testimony
before the House International Relations Committee, December 5, 2001).

<http://www.bwpp.org//cgi-bin/forum/post_download.pl?pid=13981>.

--
Communicated by:
Barbara Rosenberg <Barbara.Rosenberg@purchase.edu>

[One of the advantages of living in a working democracy is that these
questions can be asked and the subject openly discussed, even as a
government agency insists it did nothing wrong. - Mod MHJ]
See Also
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (05): letters, evidence 20080807.2428
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (04): letters, evidence 20080806.2412
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (03) 20080805.2406
Anthrax, human, 2001 - USA (02): letters, evidence 20080805.2392
Anthrax, human - USA 2001: letters, new suspect 20080803.2371
........................................................br/mhj/msp/jw
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
