<header id=018624>
Published Date: 2011-10-16 15:28:35 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Avian influenza (64): vaccination & H5N1 virus evolution
Archive Number: 20111016.3103
</header>
<body id=018624>
AVIAN INFLUENZA (64): VACCINATION AND H5N1 VIRUS EVOLUTION
**********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 14 Oct 2011
Source: CIDRAP News [edited]
http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/cidrap/content/influenza/general/news/oct1411newsscan-jrw2.html


Highly pathogenic H5N1 avian flu viruses in countries that
mass-vaccinate poultry appear to evolve more rapidly than viruses in
countries that do not, a study in Vaccine revealed. An international
research team analyzed 751 H5N1 sequences from Egypt, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Turkey, and Thailand, noting that the 1st 2 nations practice
mass vaccination, while the other 3 do not. The team wrote: "Although
the direct association between H5N1 vaccination and virus evolution is
difficult to establish, we found evidence for a difference in the
evolutionary dynamics of H5N1 viruses among countries where
vaccination was or was not adopted." The mean rates of evolution among
viruses, in thousandths of a nucleotide substitution per site per
year, were: Egypt, 5.36; Indonesia, 6.13; Nigeria, 5.20; Turkey, 4.04;
and Thailand, 2.52. In Egypt, the subclade most widely circulating in
poultry, subclade B, had a rate of 8.87. As a measure of selection
pressure, the investigators also assessed the number of positively
selected sites in the hemagglutinin gene of viruses from the various
countries: Egypt, 9; Indonesia, 6; Nigeria, 2; Turkey, 0; and
Thailand, 3. The authors emphasize that vaccination, when properly
planned and adopted, is a powerful tool against H5N1. But they
conclude that, if it is not properly implemented, "vaccination may
contribute to the rapid evolution and antigenic change of H5N1
viruses, creating opportunities for the viruses to escape from vaccine
protection."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Sat 15 Oct 2011 [accessed]
Source: Vaccine (2011), article in press, abstract [edited]
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264410X11015842


Ref: Cattoli G, et al. Evidence for differing evolutionary dynamics of
A/H5N1 viruses among countries applying or not applying avian
influenza vaccination in poultry. Vaccine (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.09.127. [Accepted for publication 30 Sep
2011; Available online 12 Oct 2011]
-------------------
Abstract

Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 (clade 2.2) was
introduced into Egypt in early 2006. Despite the control measures
taken, including mass vaccination of poultry, the virus rapidly spread
among commercial and backyard flocks. Since the initial outbreaks, the
virus in Egypt has evolved into a 3rd order clade (clade 2.2.1) and
diverged into antigenically and genetically distinct subclades. To
better understand the dynamics of HPAI H5N1 evolution in countries
that differ in vaccination policy, we undertook an in-depth analysis
of those virus strains circulating in Egypt between 2006 and 2010 and
compared countries where vaccination was adopted (Egypt and Indonesia)
to those where it was not (Nigeria, Turkey and Thailand). This study
incorporated 751 sequences (Egypt n = 309, Indonesia n = 149, Nigeria
n = 106, Turkey n = 87, Thailand n = 100) of the complete
haemagglutinin (HA) open reading frame, the major antigenic
determinant of influenza A virus. Our analysis revealed that 2 main
Egyptian subclades (termed A and B) have co-circulated in domestic
poultry since late 2007 and exhibit different profiles of positively
selected codons and rates of nucleotide substitution. The mean
evolutionary rate of subclade A H5N1 viruses was 4.07 x 10 -3
nucleotide substitutions per site, per year (HPD 95 percent,
3.23-4.91), whereas subclade B possessed a markedly higher
substitution rate (8.87 x 10 -3; 95 percent HPD 7.0-10.72 x 10 -3) and
a stronger signature of positive selection. Although the direct
association between H5N1 vaccination and virus evolution is difficult
to establish, we found evidence for a difference in the evolutionary
dynamics of H5N1 viruses among countries where vaccination was or was
not adopted. In particular, both evolutionary rates and the number of
positively selected sites were higher in virus populations circulating
in countries applying avian influenza vaccination for H5N1, compared
to viruses circulating in countries which had never used vaccination.
We, therefore, urge a greater consideration of the potential
consequences of inadequate vaccination on viral evolution.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 has become endemic in 6
countries: Bangladesh, India, the People's Republic of China, Egypt,
Indonesia and Viet Nam, of which the 4 latter ones practice a
vaccination policy. The analysis described in the above paper
addressed 2 of these countries, Egypt and Indonesia, comparing them to
3 countries where the disease is not endemic and vaccination is not
applied (Nigeria, Turkey and Thailand).

The following concluding remarks from the discussion chapter are of
interest:

"The direct association between H5N1 vaccination and virus evolution
is clearly difficult to establish since other factors, difficult to
evaluate under field conditions, might contribute to the apparent
differences in evolutionary dynamics observed here. For example,
poultry density, a variety of ecological factors or environmental
changes may contribute to the different rates of nucleotide
substitution and strength of natural selection in those viruses
circulating in poultry. In addition, the endemicity of H5N1 viruses,
the number of distinct introductions of H5N1 (e.g. in Nigeria and
Turkey), may also have influenced the pattern of viral evolution. When
properly planned and adopted, vaccination is a powerful tool for the
control and eradication of avian influenza in poultry, as demonstrated
by past experiences in Italy, Viet Nam and Hong Kong, where it reduced
economic losses and the risks for zoonotic transmission. However, if
not properly applied and not coupled with careful surveillance, robust
vaccine strategies and strict bio-security precautions, vaccination
may contribute to the rapid evolution and antigenic change of H5N1
viruses, creating opportunities for the viruses to escape from vaccine
protection. Clearly, more sophisticated and effective animal health
control and prevention measures are urgently required, such as
sustainable and efficacious vaccination strategies for poultry."

The issue has been discussed earlier this year [2011] in FAO Animal
Production and Health paper No 171: "Approaches to controlling,
preventing and eliminating H5N1 HPAI in endemic countries,"
(extensively cited in archived 20110424.1286). It included, inter
alia, the following passage:

"In several countries where vaccination has been used, antigenic
variant viruses have been detected, although it is not yet clear
whether the vaccine was responsible. In the People's Republic of
China, this problem has been addressed by introduction of new vaccine
antigens. In countries such as Egypt and Indonesia, despite access to
the necessary technology, it has proven difficult to make the
necessary changes to vaccines quickly. Systems need to be in place to
detect antigenic variants rapidly through antigenic testing and
experimental challenge of vaccinated poultry with suspected antigenic
variants, and to make adjustments to vaccines."

As recently published by the OIE (20110901.2678), a vaccine against
the novel H5N1 clade 2.3.2.1 virus, reportedly identified in Viet Nam
and China, is already in the testing phase in China.

Does a non-vaccination approach in an endemic situation deserve
consideration? The Bangladeshi experience (519 outbreaks in poultry
since March 2007, as of 6 Sep 2011; a total of 3 human cases, no
mortality) may serve as a useful test-case, deserving a thorough
epidemiological and socio-economical analysis, taking into
consideration both human and animal health aspects as well as
technical and cost-effectiveness issues.

Updated animal-health related epidemiological observations of the
Bangladeshi epizootic are included in a recent paper (Ahmed SSU,
Ersboll AK, Biswas PK, Christensen JP, Toft N (2011) Spatio-Temporal
Magnitude and Direction of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (H5N1)
Outbreaks in Bangladesh. PLoS ONE 6(9): e24324.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0024324. Available on-line
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3170297/pdf/pone.0024324.pdf).
- Mod.AS]
See Also
Avian influenza (61): world update, FAO 20111014.3079
Avian influenza, human (60): Indonesia (BA) fatal, susp. 20111010.3036
Avian influenza, human (59): transmission in mammals 20110926.2921
Avian influenza, human (58): H5N1 2.3.2.1 clade, WHO 20110902.2682
Avian influenza (56): mutation, vaccine efficacy, OIE 20110901.2678
Avian influenza, human (51): Indonesia (AH) 20110721.2199
Avian influenza (43): world update, FAO 20110511.1445
Avian influenza (41): 6 endemic countries, FAO 20110424.1286
Avian influenza, human (28): Bangladesh (DA) 20110317.0847
2010
----
Avian influenza (52): world update, FAO 20101118.4180
2007
----
Avian influenza (129): Indonesia, Viet Nam, vaccination 20070713.2247
.................................................arn/cp/msp/mpp
</body>
