<header id=009187>
Published Date: 2011-09-15 15:46:44 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Influenza (55): USA, pediatric deaths
Archive Number: 20110915.2818
</header>
<body id=009187>
INFLUENZA (55): USA, PEDIATRIC DEATHS
*************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 16 Sep 2011
Source: MMWR Weekly 60(36);1233-1238 [abridged & edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6036a1.htm?s_cid=mm6036a1_e&source=govdelivery


Influenza-Associated Pediatric Deaths - United States, September 2010
to August 2011
--------------------------------------
[This is an abbreviated text. Interested readers should access the
original document at the above URL to view the tabulated data, figures
and literature references cited. - Mod.CP]

Influenza-associated pediatric mortality has been a nationally
notifiable condition since October 2004. This report summarizes the
115 cases of influenza-associated pediatric mortality reported to CDC
that occurred from 1 Sep 2010 to 31 Aug 2011. Deaths occurred in 33
states. Nearly half of the deaths (46 percent) occurred in children
aged under 5 years. Of the children who died, 49 percent had no known
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)-defined high-risk
medical conditions, and 35 percent died at home or in the emergency
department. Of the 74 children aged 6 months or older for whom
vaccination data were available, 17 (23 percent) had been fully
vaccinated. ACIP recommends that all children aged 6 months or older
receive vaccination against influenza annually (1,2). These findings
underscore the importance of vaccinating children to prevent influenza
virus infection and its potentially severe complications. Health-care
providers should develop a comprehensive strategy to increase
vaccination coverage among children.

A case is defined as a death from a clinically compatible illness
confirmed to be influenza by a diagnostic test in a U.S. resident aged
under 18 years, with no period of complete recovery between illness
and death. Cases are identified by state and local health departments,
which collect demographic, clinical, and laboratory information using
a standard form and transmit the information to CDC via a secure,
web-based interface for data entry. Confirmatory influenza testing
methods include commercial rapid diagnostic tests, viral culture,
fluorescent antibody, enzyme immunoassay, reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and immunohistochemistry.
Although influenza vaccination of women during pregnancy has been
shown to be effective in reducing hospitalizations (1) and deaths
among infants aged under 6 months (3), data on maternal vaccination
during pregnancy were not available for infants aged under 6 months.

Of the 115 influenza-associated pediatric deaths reported, 72 (63
percent) occurred in males. The majority of cases were in non-Hispanic
white children (52 percent), followed by non-Hispanic black (18
percent) and Hispanic (15 percent) children. The highest numbers of
deaths occurred in late January and early February 2011. The median
age of patients was 6 years, and 53 cases (46 percent) were in
children aged under 5 years. 71 (62 percent) of these cases were
associated with influenza A virus infection: 30 (26 percent) 2009
influenza A (H1N1), 21 (18 percent) influenza A (H3N2), and 20 (18
percent) influenza A viruses for which the subtype was not determined.
The remaining 44 (38 percent) cases were associated with influenza B
virus infections. In comparison, U.S. national viral surveillance data
from the World Health Organization (WHO) and National Respiratory and
Enteric Virus Surveillance System (NREVSS) collaborating laboratories
indicated that 74 percent of circulating viruses were influenza A and
26 percent were influenza B viruses.

Nearly half of the children who died (49 percent) had no known
ACIP-defined high-risk medical conditions; 57 (50 percent) children
were reported with medical conditions recognized by ACIP that placed
them at increased risk for influenza-related complications, and the
medical history of 2 children was unknown (2 percent). Of the 57
children with at least one ACIP-defined high-risk condition, 31 (54
percent) had a neurologic disorder, 17 (30 percent) had pulmonary
disease, 14 (25 percent) had a chromosomal abnormality or genetic
disorder, 11 (19 percent) had congenital heart disease or other
cardiac disease, and 11 (19 percent) had asthma or reactive airway
disease. Obesity was reported in 2 (4 percent) of the 57 children.

Information on the location of death was available for 114 children;
20 (18 percent) died outside the hospital, 20 (18 percent) died in the
emergency department, and 74 (65 percent) died in the hospital after
admission. Duration of illness ranged from 0 to 57 days; 33 (31
percent) children died within 3 days of illness onset, and 69 (65
percent) died within 7 days. When compared with pediatric deaths among
children with at least one ACIP-defined high-risk condition, children
without high-risk conditions were significantly more likely to die at
home or in the emergency department (p less than 0.01 by chi-square
test). The median illness duration before death was 7 days among
children with at least one ACIP-defined high-risk condition and 4 days
among children without a high-risk condition (p less than 0.01 by
Wilcoxon rank-sum test).

Of 64 children who had specimens collected for bacterial culture from
normally sterile sites (including 58 blood cultures), 25 (39 percent)
had positive cultures; _Staphylococcus aureus_ was detected in 9 (36
percent) patients (6 with methicillin-resistant _S. aureus_, 2 with
methicillin-sensitive _S. aureus_, and one with unknown sensitivity),
_Streptococcus pneumoniae_ was detected in 6 patients, and Group A
streptococcus was detected in 3. Of the 25 cases with positive
cultures, 17 (68 percent) were in children without high-risk
conditions. When compared with children with at least one ACIP-defined
high-risk condition, children without a high-risk condition were
significantly more likely to have a positive bacterial culture from a
sterile site (p less than 0.01 by chi-square test).

The most frequent complications reported were radiographically
confirmed pneumonia (62 percent), shock or sepsis (40 percent), and
acute respiratory distress syndrome (34 percent). Encephalopathy or
encephalitis was reported in 12 children (14 percent). The antiviral
medications approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
treatment of influenza are oseltamivir for children aged one year or
older and zanamivir for children aged 7 years or older (4). Of the 47
children who received antiviral therapy, 3 (6 percent) died in the
emergency department, and 44 (94 percent) died after being admitted to
the hospital. All 3 children who died in the emergency department
received oseltamivir. Of the children who died after being admitted to
the hospital, 41 received oseltamivir only, 2 received oseltamivir and
zanamivir, and one received zanamivir only.

Information about influenza vaccination was available for 74 children
aged 6 months or older; 17 (23 percent) received influenza vaccine in
the appropriate number of doses at least 14 days before illness onset.
Of 39 vaccine-eligible children with ACIP-defined high-risk medical
conditions who had vaccination data available, 12 (31 percent) had
been vaccinated according to 2010 ACIP recommendations (1).

MMWR Editorial Note

Nearly half of the children who died from influenza virus infections
during the 2010-11 influenza season and whose deaths were reported to
CDC had no known ACIP-defined high-risk medical conditions. Of
children with ACIP-defined high-risk medical conditions, neurologic
disorders and pulmonary disease were identified most frequently. The
underlying reason for the vulnerability of patients with neurologic
disorders remains unclear but likely is attributable, in part, to
compromised respiratory function and decreased ability to handle
secretions (5). These data are consistent with findings from the
2004-05 through 2008-09 influenza seasons (5-7). Children with no
high-risk conditions had a shorter interval between illness onset and
death (4 days versus 7 days), and were more likely to die at home or
in the emergency department, and were more likely to have a positive
bacterial culture from a sterile site. In children with no high-risk
conditions, the development of a secondary bacterial co-infection
might have been the immediate cause for seeking medical care.
Physicians of children with ACIP-defined high-risk conditions might
have been more likely to hospitalize their patients early in their
illness, given their perceived greater risk of influenza-related
complications. Health-care providers should be aware that severe
complications of influenza can occur in children without high-risk
medical conditions.

Information for parents, including guidance on influenza vaccination
and danger signs in children with influenza-like illness symptoms, is
available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/pdf/freeresources/family/a_flu_guide_for_parents.pdf.

This report highlights several important points about influenza
epidemiology, vaccination, and treatment in children. Although
influenza-associated pediatric mortality is rare, influenza B was
identified in a disproportionate number of pediatric
influenza-associated deaths (38 percent). During the 2010-11 influenza
season, only 26 percent of circulating influenza viruses were
influenza B. In previous seasons, the percentage of influenza B
viruses among children with influenza-associated mortality has been
comparable to or higher than the percentage of influenza B viruses
circulating for that season (6,7).

In the United States, influenza vaccination coverage for the 2010-11
season was estimated at 49 percent in children aged 6 months-17 years.
Among children who died from influenza described in this report, 23
percent were vaccinated. Vaccination coverage was higher among
children with ACIP-defined high-risk medical conditions than among
children without high-risk medical conditions (31 percent versus 12
percent). These findings emphasize the need to improve vaccination
coverage among all children, especially those at increased risk for
influenza-related complications. To protect infants aged under 6
months who are too young to be vaccinated, ACIP recommends that
pregnant women (3) and household contacts and out-of-home caregivers
of such infants receive vaccination against influenza (1). Because
influenza vaccination of women during pregnancy has been shown to be
effective in reducing hospitalizations (1) and deaths among infants
aged under 6 months (3), improving vaccination rates among pregnant
women is a priority.

Half of the children described in this report received influenza
antiviral therapy. Early and aggressive treatment with oseltamivir or
zanamivir is recommended as soon as possible after symptom onset in a
patient with confirmed or suspected influenza who is hospitalized; who
has severe, complicated, or progressive illness; or who is at higher
risk for influenza complications, even if influenza testing is
negative (4). In outpatients without risk factors for complications,
influenza antiviral treatment should be considered if treatment can be
initiated within 48 hours of symptom onset. Results of one randomized,
controlled trial of oseltamivir treatment among children aged 1-3
years indicated that when oseltamivir was started within 24 hours of
illness onset, the median time to illness resolution was shortened by
3.5 days compared with placebo (8). Treatment with influenza antiviral
therapy of any person with confirmed or suspected influenza who
requires hospitalization is recommended, even if the patient enters
care over 48 hours after illness onset (4,9). _S. aureus_, _S.
pneumoniae_, and Group A streptococcus were the pathogens most
commonly identified in children with invasive bacterial co-infection.
Empiric antibiotic therapy and early influenza antiviral therapy are
recommended in patients with community-acquired pneumonia and
suspected influenza co-infection (4). In 2010, ACIP recommended the
use of the 13-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide-protein conjugate
vaccine for all children aged 2-59 months and children aged 60-71
months with underlying medical conditions that increase their risk for
pneumococcal disease or complications (10).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Significant points from this analysis are the following. (1)
Health-care providers should be aware that severe complications of
influenza can occur in children without high-risk medical conditions;
(2) although influenza-associated pediatric mortality is rare,
influenza B was identified in a disproportionate number of pediatric
influenza-associated deaths; (3) these findings emphasize the need to
improve vaccination coverage among all children, especially those at
increased risk for influenza-related complications, and (4) early and
aggressive treatment with oseltamivir or zanamivir is recommended as
soon as possible after symptom onset in a patient with confirmed or
suspected influenza who is hospitalized, or who has severe,
complicated, or progressive illness, or who is at higher risk for
influenza complications, Overall, however, neuraminidase-inhibitors
had limited effect.

Children are susceptible to infection by many viruses, and it would be
useful to know whether there were interactions with any of the other
ubiquitous respiratory pathogens of childhood, such as respiratory
syncytial virus. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza (54): (PA) swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, comment 20110913.2789
Influenza (53): WHO update 20110910.2758
Influenza (52): (PA), swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, 3 cases 20110906.2723
Influenza (51): swine-origin H3N2 reassortant, children 20110902.2685
Influenza (50): Australia (NS) H275Y mutation cluster 20110825.2594
Influenza (49): China, narcolepsy 20110823.2561
Influenza (48): ACIP recommendations 20110818.2510
Influenza (47): ECDC report, virus characterization 20110816.2477
Influenza (46): Australia (QL) 20110815.2472
Influenza (45): vaccine & narcolepsy 20110723.2210
Influenza (44): WHO update 20110716.2155
Influenza B - Australia: (SA), young people 20110719.2186
.................................................cp/msp/mpp
</body>
