<header id=020657>
Published Date: 2011-09-29 12:57:47 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Human enterovirus 68 - novel pathogen, worldwide
Archive Number: 20110929.2945
</header>
<body id=020657>
HUMAN ENTEROVIRUS 68 - NOVEL PATHOGEN, WORLDWIDE
************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 30 Sep 2011
Source: MMWR Weekly 2011 / 60(38);1301-1304 [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6038a1.htm?s_cid=mm6038a1_e&source=govdelivery


Clusters of Acute Respiratory Illness Associated with Human
Enterovirus 68 -- Asia, Europe, and United States, 2008--2010
------------------------------------------------------------
In the past 2 years, the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention} has learned of several clusters of respiratory illness
associated with human enterovirus 68 (HEV68), including severe
disease. HEV68 is a unique enterovirus that shares epidemiologic and
biologic features with human rhinoviruses (HRV) (1). 1st isolated in
California in 1962 from 4 children with bronchiolitis and pneumonia
(2), HEV68 has been reported rarely since that time and the full
spectrum of illness that it can cause is unknown. The 6 clusters of
respiratory illness associated with HEV68 described in this report
occurred in Asia, Europe, and the United States during 2008--2010.
HEV68 infection was associated with respiratory illness ranging from
relatively mild illness that did not require hospitalization to severe
illness requiring intensive care and mechanical ventilation. 3 cases,
2 in the Philippines and one in Japan, were fatal. In these 6
clusters, HEV68 disproportionately occurred among children. The CDC
learned of clusters of HEV68 from public health agencies requesting
consultation or diagnostic assistance and from reports presented at
scientific conferences. In each cluster, HEV68 was diagnosed by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing
targeting the 5'-nontranslated region, followed by partial sequencing
of the structural protein genes, VP4-VP2, VP1, or both, to give
definitive, enterovirus type-specific information. This report
highlights HEV68 as an increasingly recognized cause of respiratory
illness. Clinicians should be aware of HEV68 as one of many causes of
viral respiratory disease and should report clusters of unexplained
respiratory illness to the appropriate public health agency.

Philippines
-----------
During October 2008 to March 2009, an outbreak of HEV68 was detected
in the Eastern Visayas region of the Philippines among pediatric
patients hospitalized with pneumonia (3). As part of a study of the
etiology of pediatric viral respiratory illness, clinical samples from
816 patients hospitalized with pneumonia during May 2008 to May 2009
were screened retrospectively for HEV68 by molecular methods (RT-PCR
and partial sequencing); 21 (2.6 percent) were found to be positive.
The virus was 1st detected in late October 2008, and cases peaked in
early December. No cases of HEV68-related illness were found after
March 2009. Among the 21 patients with HEV68 infection, 17 (81
percent) were aged 0--4 years. Common signs and symptoms included
cough, difficulty breathing, wheezing, and retractions. 2 cases were
fatal.

Japan
------
Japan's Infectious Agent Surveillance Report (IASR) system, which
receives reports from local public health laboratories, 1st received
sporadic reports of HEV68 in 2005, with 10 or fewer cases identified
each year until 2010. During 2010, an increase in HEV68 cases was
observed, with more than 120 cases. Most HEV68 infections occurred
during July to October 2010, with detections throughout Japan during
this time. Clinical and demographic information was only available on
a subset of 11 pediatric patients who were positive for HEV68. Of
these 11 HEV68 cases, 10 were in patients diagnosed with acute
respiratory illnesses, such as asthmatic bronchitis or pneumonia, and
one in a patient with febrile convulsions (4). Of the 11 patients, 10
were aged 0 to 4 years. One fatal case occurred, involving a boy aged
4 years in whom HEV68 was detected by nucleic acid amplification from
a pharyngeal swab. The boy, who had been healthy with no underlying
disease, arrived at the emergency department in cardiopulmonary arrest
and could not be resuscitated (5).

Netherlands
-----------
During the period August to November 2010, HEV68 was detected within a
prospective, hospital-based study of respiratory infections in the
northern part of the Netherlands. All rhinovirus-positive samples
obtained during September 2009 to January 2011 were sequenced as part
of a validation study. Specimens from 24 patients with acute
respiratory illness, including pneumonia, asthma exacerbation, and
wheezing, were positive for HEV68. Among the 24 patients, 23 were
hospitalized during their illness, and 5 required intensive care. 3 of
the infections were acquired while in the hospital. Half of the 24
patients with HEV68 infection were aged 20 years or older. Chronic
underlying illness was present in approximately 80 percent of
patients; no deaths were reported.

The National Institute for Public Health and the Environment also
observed an increase in HEV68 infections among patients sampled in
2010 by the Netherlands sentinel general practice network for
surveillance of acute respiratory infections among 42 practices.
Samples have been collected in this network since 1994 and analyzed by
RT-PCR for enteroviruses, allowing for a retrospective
characterization of trends. As of the fall of 2010, a substantially
greater number of HEV68 infections had occurred throughout the
Netherlands that year than in previous years.

United States
-------------
Georgia: In September 2009, a hospital in Atlanta started using a new,
multipathogen testing system (Luminex xTAG Respiratory Viral Panel
[RVP], Luminex Corporation, Austin, Texas) for respiratory viral
testing in its laboratory. The system can detect several respiratory
viruses, including HRVs and enteroviruses, which are identified by the
system only as "entero-rhinovirus." During the next respiratory
illness season, September 2009 to April 2010, adult patients at the
Atlanta hospital facility who were diagnosed with "entero-rhinovirus"
appeared to be more ill than those diagnosed with HRV in previous
seasons. Nucleic acid sequencing of 68 specimens from the 2009 to 2010
season revealed that 62 (91.2 percent) contained HRV and 6 (8.8
percent) contained HEV68. Among the 6 patients with HEV68, 3 were aged
over 50 years and 2 were immunocompromised. 5 patients had fever and 4
had cough. One patient had abnormal findings on chest radiography that
were attributed to cryptococcosis. No other cases were associated with
coinfections. 3 patients were hospitalized for a median of 4 days.
None of the patients required admission to an intensive-care unit
(ICU), and none died.

Pennsylvania: In mid-September 2009, a pediatric hospital in
Philadelphia noted more than twice the proportion of respiratory
specimens testing positive for HRV by RT-PCR compared with those seen
during previous fall HRV seasons. An investigation identified 390
children treated at the hospital during August to October 2009 from
whom at least one respiratory specimen was positive for HRV.
Respiratory specimens from 66 of these children were sent to the CDC
for further molecular characterization. HEV68 was identified in 28 (42
percent) of the specimens. Among the 28 patients with HEV68 infection,
15 (54 percent) were aged 0 to 4 years, and 15 were admitted to the
ICU. The median duration of hospitalization was 5 days, and none of
the patients died.

Arizona: During August to September 2010, hospital officials at an
isolated community hospital in rural Arizona noted an increase in
pediatric admissions for lower respiratory tract illness. During this
time, 43 percent of pediatric admissions were for respiratory illness,
compared with a mean of 17 percent during the same period in the 3
previous years, a statistically significant difference. Similar
illness, characterized by cough and tachypnea or hypoxemia, occurred
in 18 patients. Abnormal lung examination result and wheezing,
particularly new-onset wheezing, were noted. At least half of children
with available chest radiographs had infiltrates. Hospitalization
lasted a median of 1.5 days, and no deaths were reported. Despite
viral testing and blood cultures performed at the Arizona Department
of Health Services on patients with specimens available, no pathogen
was detected. Nasopharyngeal specimens of 7 patients were sent to the
CDC for further testing, and HEV68 was identified in 5 of the
patients, one of whom also was positive by RT-PCR testing for
Streptococcus pneumonia.

MMWR Editorial Note
-------------------
Enteroviruses and HRV are common, closely related human pathogens in
the family _Picornaviridae_. Most enterovirus infections are
asymptomatic. When an enterovirus does cause disease, clinical
manifestations vary widely and can include mild upper respiratory
illness, febrile rash illness, and neurologic illness, such as aseptic
meningitis and encephalitis. In contrast, HEV68 has been associated
almost exclusively with respiratory disease (1,6). Since the early
1960s, only sporadic cases of infection with HEV68 have been reported
(6,7). Identification of a large number of patients with HEV68
respiratory disease detected during a single season, such as described
in this report, is a recent phenomenon.

Whether this increase in recognized cases is attributable to improved
diagnostics or whether the clusters themselves represent an emergence
of the pathogen is unknown. The technology for isolation of
enteroviruses is not new. Viral culture has been available since the
1950s, although antisera for identifying an isolate as HEV68 were not
widely available initially. The National Enterovirus Surveillance
System, which has collected information on enterovirus isolates in the
United States since 1961, recorded 26 isolates during 1987--2005; the
highest number in a single year was 11 in 2003 (7).

During the past decade, improvements in nucleic acid amplification
methods have increased the sensitivity of enterovirus detection and
typing. In the clusters reported during 2008--2010, HEV68 was detected
by real-time RT-PCR. Some sites used commercial, multipathogen
detection systems that can detect enteroviruses. 2 such systems,
Luminex xTAG RVP and Idaho Technologies (Salt Lake City, Utah)
FilmArray Respiratory Panel, are approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for use in clinical settings in the United States. Both
systems use broadly reactive primers that amplify RNA from either HRVs
or enteroviruses (results are reported as "entero-rhinovirus" or
"human rhinovirus/enterovirus").

Classic enteroviruses have prominent summer-fall seasonality in
temperate climates (7,8), and outbreaks of enteroviruses tend to occur
in several-year cycles. In the United States, echovirus 9 typically
peaks every 3 to 5 years; echovirus 30 occurs irregularly and can
remain active for several years (7). In France, HEV68 was associated
with an autumnal peak of respiratory tract infections in 2008 (6). The
seasonality of the HEV68 clusters described in this report typically
fall within or later than the typical enterovirus season in the areas
from which cases were reported (7).

These recent clusters confirm that HEV68 is associated with outbreaks
of respiratory illness severe enough to require hospitalization, and
in some cases, might contribute to patient death. New-onset wheezing
or asthma exacerbation were notable symptoms. However, in each
cluster, respiratory specimens typically were collected from persons
who had sought medical care or were hospitalized, which would have
biased these reports toward more severe disease.

The spectrum of illness caused by HEV68 remains unclear. HEV68, like
other enteroviruses, has been associated with central nervous system
disease (9). Further investigation could help clarify the epidemiology
and spectrum of disease caused by HEV68. Some diagnostic tests might
not detect HEV68 or might misidentify it as an HRV. The gold standard
test for HEV68 detection is partial sequencing of the structural
protein genes, VP4-VP2 or VP1. Cases in this report were confirmed
with this method. However, the sensitivity of multipathogen detection
systems for HEV68 detection is unknown. Laboratories using the CDC
rhinovirus real-time RT-PCR assay (10) as originally described and as
recently modified (forward primer 5'-CPAGCCTGCGTGGY-3') should be
aware that it might misidentify HEV68 as an HRV and lacks the
sensitivity to detect all HEV68 cases.

Clinicians should be aware of HEV68 as one of many causes of viral
respiratory disease. Clusters of unexplained respiratory illness
should be reported to the appropriate public health agency. Local or
state health departments may contact the CDC for assistance with
laboratory diagnostics or consultation through the Unexplained
Respiratory Disease Outbreak network
(http://emergency.cdc.gov/urdo).

References:
-----------
[1] Oberste MS, Maher K, Schnurr D, et al. Enterovirus 68 is
associated with respiratory illness and shares biological features
with both the enteroviruses and the rhinoviruses. J Gen Virol
2004;85:2577--84.
[2] Schieble JH, Fox VL, Lennette EH. A probable new human
picornavirus associated with respiratory disease. Am J Epidemiology
1967;85:297--310.
[3] Imamura T, Fuji N, Suzuki A, et al. Enterovirus 68 among children
with severe acute respiratory infection, Philippines. Emerg Infect Dis
2011;7:1430--5.
[4] Kaida A, Kubo H, Sekiguchi J, et al. Detection of enterovirus 68
from infants with respiratory infection and febrile convulsion
[Japanese]. Infect Agents Surveil Rep 2010;31:300.
[5] Ryu H, Yukie S, Yoshinori K, et al. Detection of enterovirus 68
from the throat swab of a patient who died of cardiopulmonary arrest
of unknown origin [Japanese]. Infect Agents Surveil Rep 2010;31:361.
[6] Petitjean-Lecherbonnier J, Dina J, Nguyen E, et al. Molecular
diagnosis of respiratory enterovirus infections: use of PCR and
molecular identification for a best approach of the main circulating
strains during 2008. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2011;59:113--21.
[7] CDC. Enterovirus surveillance---United States, 1970--2005. MMWR
2006;55(No. SS-8).
[8] Wang Y, Cheng H, Chen H, et al. Circulating viruses associated
with severe complicated enterovirus infection in Taiwan. Pediatr
Infect Dis J 2010;29:334--9.
[9] Kreuter JD, Barnes A, McCarthy JE, et al. A fatal central nervous
system enterovirus 68 infection. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2011;135:793--6.
[10] Lu X, Holloway B, Dare RK, et al. Real-time reverse
transcription-PCR assay for comprehensive detection of human
rhinoviruses. J Clin Microbiol 2008;46:533--9.

[Readers should consult the original text via the source URL to view
the tabulated data. - Mod.CP]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Human enterovirus 68 (HEV68) is a unique enterovirus that shares
epidemiologic and biologic features with human rhinoviruses. Although
isolated cases of HEV68 have been reported since the virus was
described in 1962, clusters of cases have been recognized only
recently. The clusters described in this report occurred late in the
typical enterovirus season and included severe cases, 3 of which were
fatal.

This report highlights HEV68 as an increasingly recognized cause of
respiratory illness. Clinicians should be aware of HEV68 as one of
many causes of viral respiratory disease and should report clusters of
unexplained respiratory illness. These recent clusters confirm that
HEV68 is associated with outbreaks of respiratory illness severe
enough to require hospitalization, and in some cases, might contribute
to patient death.

Whether this increase in recognized cases is attributable to improved
diagnostics or whether the clusters themselves represent an emergence
of the pathogen remains to be established. - Mod.CP]
See Also
2010
----
Non-polio enteroviruses & parechoviruses, 2006-2008 - USA 20101209.4394
2009
----
Enteroviruses and diabetes 20090308.0959
.................................................cp/ejp/lm
</body>
