<header id=001228>
Published Date: 2008-11-16 15:00:35 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Anthrax, bovine - Zimbabwe (02): Matabeleland north
Archive Number: 20081116.3621
</header>
<body id=001228>
ANTHRAX, BOVINE - ZIMBABWE (02): MATABELELAND NORTH
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[1]
Date: 14 Nov 2008
Source: The Zimbabwe Tribune [edited]
<http://www.hararetribune.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=750:anthrax-claims-6-lives-in-lupane&catid=54:news&Itemid=172>


At least 6 people and more than 200 cattle have died in Lupane
District in Zimbabwe's western province of Matabeleland North
following an outbreak of anthrax.

Although Provincial Medical Director for Matabeleland North Irene
Ndiweni could not comment, saying she was attending a conference in
Victoria Falls, sources in the Ministry of Health and Child Welfare
insisted that 6 people have died so far from the disease. Some of the
villagers who ate the affected meat are reported to be still
undergoing treatment.

Principal Director in the Department of Veterinary Services Stuart
Hargreaves said he had not yet received a comprehensive report on the
anthrax outbreak.

Provincial Veterinary Officer in Matabeleland North Dr Polex Moyo
confirmed the outbreak of the disease but said it was now under
control. "There was an outbreak of anthrax in Dongamuzi last week
where a large number of cattle died. I cannot give you the correct
figures now about the number of the cattle which died since I am not
in my office, but it was a large number," said Dr Moyo. "We have put
the area under quarantine. We have also vaccinated the area, and the
situation is coming under control. Villagers should rest assured that
their cattle will be saved."

Reports emanating from Lupane indicate that many villagers lost their
cattle to the disease.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Other reports:
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2008-11/15/content_10360542.htm>.

At 1st glance, unfortunately, this is not an unusual livestock
anthrax outbreak for Zimbabwe, but read on. - Mod.MHJ]

******
[2]
Date: 15 Nov 2008
Source: Radio Voice of the People [edited]
<http://www.radiovop.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4413&Itemid=755>


Bulawayo residents are living in fear of anthrax, and most have
stopped buying meat from vendors after an outbreak that has killed at
least 6 people and more than 200 cattle in Lupane district in
Matabeleland North province in the last 2 weeks.

The majority of Bulawayo residents buy their meat from unlicensed
vendors who source cattle from outlying rural areas, especially from
Lupane, which is not very far away from the city. Lupane is about 120
km from Bulawayo and is a prime beef area. The majority of meat
vendors in Bulawayo sell un-inspected meat smuggled from the rural
areas at night for sale in the city.

"People are not buying meat from vendors since reports of the anthrax
outbreak and deaths surfaced in the media; people are only purchasing
meat from the licensed butcheries, which, however, charge very high
prices," said a Makokoba resident who said he buys his meat outside
the local beerhall. He said meat from street vendors is far much cheaper.

Dozens of villagers in Lupane who ate the infected meat are still
undergoing treatment at the local hospital. The Principal Director in
the Department of Veterinary Services, Stuart Hargreaves, this week
said while he has received reports of the anthrax outbreak, he is yet
to receive a comprehensive report on the outbreak.

200 cattle died after an anthrax outbreak in Dongamuzi village in
Lupane, and sources say controlling the disease will be difficult as
vaccines are not readily available.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Note the journalist's comment that Bulawayo buys its beef from the
Lupane district. The village cited as the location of the current
anthrax outbreak was the focus of a local news article: see item [3]
below published 3 weeks ago on the current food security situation in
Zimbabwe, which has reportedly reached a famine crisis situation in
the communal lands areas of the country.

An IRIN article from this week on the food security situation
contains a quote from a resident of the village in question: see item
[4] below. Further background information on the famine situation in
the Lupane area is in the link at the end of item [4] below.

The rainy season should be just starting in the region, and the 1st
crop yields are still several months away in most areas of the
country. - Mod.MHJ]

******
[3]
Date: 22 Oct 2008
Source: The Zimbabwean [edited]
<http://www.thezimbabwean.co.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=15875:death-stealthly-knocks-at-villagers-doors-as-zim-leaders-bicker&catid=31:top%20zimbabwe%20stories&Itemid=66>


At Dongamuzi village in Zimbabwe's arid Matabeleland North province,
[a villager] despairs: "No one will survive. If it continues like
this, we will all die, there is no food in the shops, and nothing is
coming from the government."

[This elderly village woman, referred to in local Ndebele language as
granny] says her village got word several weeks ago that some
international relief agencies, or, as she likes to call them,
"donors," would soon be delivering food aid in the area. "But we
haven't seen anything yet; all we can do is just wait," the 60-year
old lady said, her ashen and gaunt features no doubt a result of age
as much as they are a product of many days surviving on very little
food or nothing at all.

To visit Dongamuzi village, 150 km northeast of Zimbabwe's 2nd
largest city of Bulawayo, is to come face to face with a humanitarian
disaster that is steadily unfolding in Zimbabwe's hunger-stricken
villages, as the country's political leaders continue to bicker over
how to share power in a unity government.

Analysts see a government of national unity proposed under last
month's [October 2008] power-sharing agreement as the 1st step to
ending decade-long food shortages and economic crisis in Zimbabwe.
Fresh efforts to end a deadlock between President Robert Mugabe and
opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) party leader Morgan
Tsvangirai over control of key posts in the unity government flopped
on Monday [20 Oct 2008] because the MDC leader could not travel to a
regional summit in Swaziland to discuss the matter after the
government refused him a passport.

A new summit has been scheduled for 27 Oct 2008 to try to save the
power-sharing deal from collapse.

Back at Dongamuzi, the desperation visibly etched on the face of a
neighbor as he/she begs for food from another who is lucky to have a
little to spare from supplies sent from abroad is hard to miss. Many
young Zimbabweans have responded to their country's crisis by fleeing
abroad where conditions of living are better. The exiles have become
a vital lifeline for family and relatives back home by regularly
sending food packs and cash to those left behind. But very few
families here at Dongamuzi have had the luck to have a child living
and working abroad.

With no food in the shops and nothing coming from the government's
bankrupt Grain Marketing Board (GMB) or from international relief
agencies as yet, the majority of villagers are simply surviving on
wild fruits and whatever little else they can lay their hands on.

Umkhuna, a yellowish-brown fruit indigenous to the area has become a
staple for many families. Some villagers pound the fruit, squeeze out
the juice and mix it with a bit of mealie-meal to make porridge. The
sweet juice is a good substitute for sugar, which, like every other
basic survival commodity, is in short supply in the country.

Other families just drink the sweet-tasting wild juice, which they
say is refreshing and energizing. Umkhuna can also be eaten as dried
fruit. Villagers also survive on the marula and baobab fruits that
are common in Dongamuzi.

But the widowed [60 year old woman] who is taking care of her 4
orphaned grandchildren whose parents succumbed to HIV/AIDS, says
death is knocking at the door for many in her village because even
the Umkhuna is fast becoming scarce. "What has been saving people
from starving to death is the fruit umkhuna, but the fruit is running
out, and we are staring death in the face," she said.

A neighbor to [the 60 year old woman] said the children and the
elderly who are no longer able to hunt for wild fruits are the worst
affected by hunger. He said he had withdrawn his 4 children from
primary school after one of them collapsed in class because of
hunger. "It is useless for children to go to school, as they collapse
at school due to hunger. They have to walk 10 km to school, and that
is energy sapping," [he] said, adding that several of his neighbors
had also stopped their children going to school.

International food agencies, which are only resuming operations in
some parts of Zimbabwe after Mugabe's government lifted a ban on the
relief groups, say millions of Zimbabweans have already run out of
food or are surviving on just one meal a day. The UN World Food
Programme (WFP) about 2 weeks ago called on international donors to
make available USD 140 million in emergency food supplies in order to
prevent Zimbabwe's food shortages from deteriorating into a disaster.
The WFP expects hunger to worsen around January 2009, when an
estimated 5.1 million Zimbabweans or about 45 percent of the
country's 12 million population will require food aid to avoid starvation.

But Njabuliso Mguni, the Member of Parliament for Lupane West
constituency under which Dongamuzi village falls, believes things
could get worse in his constituency well before January 2009 unless
food aid is urgently made available. Mguni, who belongs to the MDC
party's breakaway faction led by Arthur Mutambara, told ZimOnline:
"There is no food for the people. The GMB has nothing, and people are
exchanging their livestock for grain ... very soon people will start
succumbing to the hunger."

The parliamentarian urged the government to send out a new appeal for
food aid to the international community. However, mobilizing food aid
for Gogo MaNgwenya and her 4 orphaned grandchildren may not be
exactly what is on the minds of Zimbabwe's political leaders engaged
in a high stakes battle for the spoils of the 15 Sep 2008 power-sharing deal.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[4]
Date: 14 Nov 2008
Source: IRIN UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs [edited]
<http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=81475>

Impatience among the hungry and food relief operations put on the
back foot by a nearly 3-month ban are complicating an already
desperate situation as Zimbabwe barrels towards its peak food crisis,
less than 2 months away. The UN estimates that in the 1st quarter of
2009 more than 5.1 million people, nearly half the population, will
require food assistance, although many humanitarian workers privately
fear the extent of malnutrition may be deeper than 1st thought, a
worrying situation that has surfaced in the past few days after a
severe funding shortfall resulted in a cut in food rations to below
the minimum monthly requirement.

Preparations by food relief agencies for the impending crisis were
compromised by President Robert Mugabe's ban on their operations --
for alleged political partisanship -- as he fought for his political
life during a presidential run-off that he eventually won, although
the high levels of violence and intimidation made the international
community dismiss the poll as un-free and unfair. The ban disrupted
the vetting process of potential beneficiaries, and the delay in
distributions are causing rising levels of frustration among those in
need of emergency food assistance.


[A 54 year old man], whose extended family includes his 4 children, 8
grand-daughters and several other relatives, has survived on the
roots and wild fruits available in Matabeleland South Province for
the past 4 months. "The donor agencies are taking long, and already,
as it is, we are facing death due to hunger, but some villages have
benefited from food donations. But we have been assured by the relief
agencies that we will be benefiting soon," he told IRIN.

[His] family has borrowed relief food from people in the neighbouring
districts of Ntepe and Gwanda, who have received the reduced food
rations from World Vision, a Christian relief and development
non-governmental organisation (NGO). "Once we get our rations, then
we will pay back what we got from the neighbors, but the rations are
taking too long to come," [he] said. World Vision is covering 6 of
the 7 districts in Matabeleland South Province.

Rations have been cut to below the recommended monthly calorific
minimum in response to dwindling food supplies, as international
donors have failed to heed a USD 140 million emergency appeal by the
UN World Food Programme (WFP). At current rates, WFP has sufficient
food supplies to last until the end of December 2008.

''We are making up for the lost time. The process should have started
long before the situation got so bad, but we were not on the ground
[because of the government ban]. The need in the country currently is
overwhelming. We have had a situation where communities are doing
whatever they can to access food, and that, in some instances,
includes them inflating the number of family members. We have to go
through the figures and rectify where there are anomalies before we
can commence the feeding process. Each person now receives a monthly
ration of 10 kg of maize, 1 kg of beans and 0.6 litres of cooking
oil, in a bid to stretch resources. Recipients were previously given
12 kg of maize and 1.8 kg of beans. We are still vetting some
communities and verifying information that we have, and because of
the magnitude of the crisis and the objective of feeding all
deserving cases, the vetting process has not been easy due to the
numbers involved," Wilfred Sikhukhula, director of World Vision's
Humanitarian Emergency Aid, one of the relief agencies falling under
the US-funded Consortium for Southern Africa Food Security Emergency
(C-SAFE), told IRIN.

An aid worker, who declined to be named, told IRIN that the
exaggeration of family sizes was becoming commonplace, as "people,
out of hunger, believe if they inflate the numbers, they will get
more and they will not starve in future." The strict processes used
to determine need are not readily understood by the beneficiaries,
and the wait for food assistance often translates into accusations of
favoritism by humanitarian agencies.

"The relief agencies are selective; how did they decide which village
to start with, and which people to give the food to? Some people, who
are deserving, were removed from the list and were told that they
will not get any food," an irate [49 year old woman], in the
Dongamuzi area near Lupane, the provincial capital of Matabeleland
North Province, told IRIN. Relief agencies use a standard procedure
for determining who should receive food 1st: top of the list are
households headed by children, the elderly and the chronically ill,
followed by single-parent families, households with orphans, and
families with a high dependency ratio.

Next in line are beneficiaries that include families with no fixed or
temporary income, families with no ownership or custody of assets
with a market value that could be exchanged for cash or barter, and
those without remittances from national or international sources.

[A 46 year old woman], single parent of 3 children in Chirumanzi
district, about 120 km southeast of Gweru, the Midlands provincial
capital, went on a fruitless 100 km journey on foot searching for
maize. She had left her children with no food, apart from a small
stock of the wild fruit known locally as hacha. "I had been away for
4 days looking for maize-meal for my 3 children and myself but could
not get it because where it was available, it was being sold in
foreign currency, which I did not have," [she] told IRIN. In
desperation, she submitted her name, with other people from her
district, to an NGO operating in the area, and after 3 days was
called to a local shopping centre, where staff from the NGO provided
each family with 20 kg of maize-meal, 2 litres of cooking oil and 10
kg of maize seed.

"It was such a relief. Without that help from the NGO, my family
would have definitely starved. Considering the size of my family and
given that we have to depend on what has been given to us almost
exclusively, the food aid is not much, but that little makes a big
difference. It was such a relief. Without that help from the NGO, my
family would have definitely starved," she said.

Without the donation, her final option would have been to slaughter
one of her 2 remaining cows, but it would have left her without
draught power for the main farming season, which has already begun.

[A 60 year old man], who lives in the same area, also received a
donation from the NGO. "I just hope this is the beginning of good
things to come. For months, officials from the district headquarters
have been sending word that we will soon receive food aid from the
government, but promises don't drive our hunger away," he told IRIN.
"I wonder why the same government that purports to be disturbed by
our plight has been barring the NGOs from distributing food to us,
only to reverse that position when some people have starved to death," he said.

[His 30 year old son], has a job as a supervisor at a Gweru factory.
His salary of a few dollars a month, which is continually eroded by
the inflation rate of 231 million percent, supports his 5 children
and his father. "Urban life is now so stressful, and I am struggling
to keep my head above the water, fending for my family. After every 2
weeks, I am forced to look for 20 kg of maize to send home, and my
prayer is that the NGOs continue with their work, for that will
lessen my burden," [he] told IRIN.

Fambai Ngirande, spokesperson for the National Association of
Non-Governmental Organisations, the NGO umbrella body, told IRIN that
the distribution of food "though still coming in small measures, is
refreshing. People have nowhere to turn to but NGOs, because the
government, even though it is supposed to play the leading role in
ensuring food security for affected communities, is proving to lack
capacity or will," he commented. "It should be remembered that relief
operators are overwhelmed and are constrained by the lack of
resources and politically motivated disruptions as the food crisis
deepens daily."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[For a Zimbabwean survival recipe book, go to:
<http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=81185>.

When you have rural starvation, extreme poverty, and sudden livestock
deaths, the carcasses are going to be harvested whatever the warnings
or prior experience. When you depend on your animals for ploughing
when the wet season comes, it is foolhardy to sell them when alive.
When dead, that is something else. Poor relatives are usually the
animal minders. When the owners visit to discover what had happened
and are presented with the hide, skull, and dried meat as proof that
the animal(s) had not been stolen or sold, they will return home with
the latter to eat and to sell, thus the warnings in the Bulawayo press.

Anthrax outbreaks have been reported in Matabeleland North by OIE in
2005, 2006 and 2007 in cattle and small ruminants.

Map of Zimbabwe, see:
<http://www.fallingrain.com/world/ZI/>,
<http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/africa/zimbabwe_rel_2002.pdf>.
Lupane is NW of Bulawayo - Mod.MHJ]
See Also
Anthrax, bovine - Zimbabwe: (Matabeleland N) 20080527.1724
2006
----
Anthrax, bovine - Zimbabwe (Matabeleland) 20060430.1256
.........................................jd/mpp/mhj/msp/mpp

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
