<header id=021274>
Published Date: 2011-10-24 05:33:07 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Tuberculosis - Ireland: (LN) prison, hospital
Archive Number: 20111024.3165
</header>
<body id=021274>
TUBERCULOSIS - IRELAND: (LEINSTER) PRISON, HOSPITAL
***************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sat 22 Oct 2011
Source: Irish Independent [edited]
http://www.independent.ie/national-news/concerns-over-tb-in-prisons-as-warder-is-taken-ill-2913930.html


Fears of a deadly tuberculosis (TB) outbreak in Irish prisons were
growing last night [21 Oct 2011] after a prison officer was
hospitalised with the potentially deadly disease, which he contracted
from an inmate. Around 45 prison guards who were in contact with the
infected prisoner have been screened for the disease and 30 have
tested positive for exposure to TB. However, they are not contagious.

Cloverhill [in County Dublin] is the country's leading remand prison
and there are fears that inter-prison transfers could have spread the
infection further. It is understood that one prison officer in the
midlands is currently being treated for TB.

During the summer [2011], a prisoner detained at Cloverhill was
diagnosed with TB. After he fell ill, a number of staff was checked
for symptoms. Since then, several members of staff took sick and were
diagnosed with TB.

>From Monday [24 Oct 2011], those who tested positive will receive
x-rays and lung tests.

In a meeting with prison officials yesterday [21 Oct 2011], prison
officers expressed outrage at the situation and some threatened a
staff walkout. It is understood that some members of staff were in
tears at the news. The Prison Service said the HSE [Health Service
Executive] was investigating the outbreak.

News of the infection came as it was revealed that patients in a
Drogheda hospital [in County Louth] have also been exposed to the
disease. The HSE has confirmed that a patient with TB was in the
Emergency Department of Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital in Drogheda for 5
days and could have infected others. Some 3 patients who were in
"close contact" with the TB patient have now been offered screening.

[Byline: Dearbhail McDonald, Fiona Elli, Elaine Keogh]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The news release above seems to be describing 2 separate and
apparently unrelated tuberculosis incidents: one in the Cloverhill
Remand Prison and the other in the Emergency Department of Our Lady of
Lourdes Hospital in Drogheda. Both incidents involve unprotected
exposure of staff and either other inmates in the case of the prison
or patients in the case of the hospital to a person with active
tuberculosis. Cloverhill Prison is located in the western suburbs of
Dublin and Drogheda is an industrial and port town in County Louth on
the east coast of Ireland, 56 km (35 mi) north of Dublin
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drogheda).

Cloverhill Prison, which opened in 2000, has a capacity for 431 adult
male prisoners and juveniles aged 15 and over. The prisoners are
housed in 5 different locations within the prison: 'A' division or
wing holds the ordinary prisoners; 'B' wing holds the prisoners who
are on methadone maintenance; 'C' wing holds foreign-nationals; 'D'
division holds "protection prisoners"; and 'E' wing holds prisoners
convicted or on remand for sex offences and who are under protection
from other prisoners
(http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/JELR/Cloverhill2005.pdf/Files/Cloverhill2005.pdf).
The prison consists of 63 single cells, 5 double cells, and 120 treble
cells
(http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/JELR/Cloverhill2005.pdf/Files/Cloverhill2005.pdf).
Cells designed for one person measure 9.5 sq m (97 sq ft), which has
been thought to be "a reasonable size" for single-person
accommodation; but the larger cells measuring around 11 sq m (118 sq
ft) used to detain up to 3 detainees, have been cited for being too
small for this number of prisoners
(http://www.detention-in-europe.org/images/stories/detention%20ireland.pdf).
Prisoners are locked in these cells for more than 17 hours a day.

When inspected in 2005 Cloverhill was holding 116 non-nationals, 65
prisoners on protection, and 230 others
(http://www.inis.gov.ie/en/JELR/Cloverhill2005.pdf/Files/Cloverhill2005.pdf).

Immigrants are remanded to Cloverhill because they have either not
been granted "permission to land", are applicants for asylum, are due
to be deported, are awaiting trial for immigration-related reasons, or
are foreign nationals suspected of criminal offences
(http://www.detention-in-europe.org/images/stories/detention%20ireland.pdf).
On one occasion the nationalities included Chinese, Nigerian,
Romanian, Russian, South African and Ukrainian.

Cloverhill Prison is located adjacent to Wheatfield Prison, and the 2
prisons share many services
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloverhill_Prison).
<
http://www.detention-in-europe.org/images/stories/detention%20ireland.pdf>

Dublin and Drogheda can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail
interactive map of Ireland at http://healthmap.org/r/1mwC.

Transmission of tuberculosis within prisons is a recognized problem
worldwide; in addition, high levels of multidrug resistant
tuberculosis have been reported from some prisons
(http://www.who.int/tb/challenges/prisons/story_1/en/index.html).
Tuberculosis has occurred among persons incarcerated in US
correctional facilities at a higher rate than the general population
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5509a1.htm). Prisoners
typically come from segments of the population at higher risk for
tuberculosis (such as, injection drugs used, persons of low
socioeconomic status, and persons with human immunodeficiency virus
[HIV] infection. These persons often receive insufficient medical care
before incarceration. Also, the physical structure of correctional
facilities, such as close living quarters and inadequate ventilation,
contributes to tuberculosis transmission. Movement of inmates into and
out of prisons without adequate follow-up care can facilitate
transmission of tuberculosis to the general community and to other
prisons.

Although the type of prisoner who developed contagious tuberculosis at
Cloverhill is not stated in the above news release, incarcerated
immigrants from countries with high TB prevalence pose a particular
problem for prisons. In the US, the case rate among foreign-born
persons is now at least 8 times higher than among US-born persons
(http://www.cdcnpin.org/scripts/tb/tb.asp). In 1991, 73 percent of
reported TB cases were among US-born persons (8.2 cases per 100 000)
while 27 percent were in foreign-born persons (33.9 per 100 000). In
comparison, 55 percent of TB cases in 2005 occurred in the foreign
born. A similar problem of tuberculosis among foreign-born has been
noted in the UK; (see ProMED-mail post Tuberculosis, children - UK:
use of BCG vaccine 20100717.2386).

Because of the hazard that inmates with undiagnosed contagious
tuberculosis pose for other inmates and correctional staff, the US CDC
has issued guidelines for the prevention and control of tuberculosis
in correctional and detention facilities
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5509a1.htm). These
guidelines include the following:

Newly arrived inmates should not be housed with other inmates until
they have been appropriately screened for TB disease. The CDC
emphasizes that all inmates with suspected contagious TB should be
placed in airborne infection isolation immediately. Case finding and
prompt diagnosis of active tuberculosis in inmates at the time of
admission to a correctional facility, before the inmate is integrated
into the general correctional facility population and followed by
initiation of an adequate regimen of directly observed therapy,
remains the most effective means of preventing disease transmission.

The CDC also suggests that, in addition to screening at intake,
routine (that is, at least annual) screening for latent TB infection
(LTBI) of long-term inmates who are at high risk for progressing to TB
disease and would likely benefit from a course of treatment, and
screening for LTBI of correctional facility staff (such as, custody
and medical) should be incorporated into the TB-control program.
However, benefit of screening inmates for LTBI is often limited by
inability to ensure completion of LTBI treatment, particularly in
short-term correctional facilities. To guard against this, early
discharge planning should be coordinated with subsequent care by local
public health staff and other key partners. Continuing education of
inmates, detainees, and correctional facility staff is necessary to
maximize cooperation and participation. - Mod.ML]
See Also
Tuberculosis, latent, nosocomial, infants - Italy (03): (Rome) 20110901.2677
Tuberculosis, latent, nosocomial, infants - Italy (02): (Rome) 20110830.2668
Tuberculosis, latent, nosocomial, infants - Italy: (Rome) 20110825.2587
2010
----
Tuberculosis - UK: resurgence 20101223.4522
Tuberculosis, children - UK: use of BCG vaccine 20100717.2386
2007
----
Tuberculosis, hospital exposure - USA (WI) (02) 20070901.2883
Tuberculosis, hospital exposure - USA (WI) 20070831.2864
2005
----
Tuberculosis, hospital exposures - USA (MA) 20050616.1702
Tuberculosis - Iraq (Missan) 20050613.1652
Tuberculosis, nursery school - Spain (Catalonia) 20050523.1416
Tuberculosis, supermarket exposure - Netherlands (Zeist) (03) 20050225.0602
Tuberculosis, supermarket exposure - Netherlands (Zeist) 20050207.0411
.................................................sb/ml/mj/dk
</body>
