<header id=040779>
Published Date: 2011-12-14 18:03:40 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Undiagnosed renal disease, men - C. America: field workers, RFI
Archive Number: 20111214.3599
</header>
<body id=040779>
UNDIAGNOSED RENAL DISEASE, MEN - CENTRAL AMERICA: FIELD WORKERS,
REQUEST FOR INFORMATION
*****************************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 13 Dec 2011
Source: BBC News Magazine, PRI's (Public Radio International) The
World report [edited]
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-16007129


A mysterious epidemic is sweeping Central America -- it's the 2nd
biggest cause of death among men in El Salvador, and in Nicaragua it's
a bigger killer of men than HIV and diabetes combined. It's
unexplained but the latest theory is that the victims are literally
working themselves to death.

In the western lowlands of Nicaragua, in a region of vast sugar cane
fields, sits the tiny community of La Isla. The small houses are a
patchwork of concrete and wood. Pieces of cloth serve as doors.

[A man] emerges from his house to greet me. He's pale, and his
cheekbones protrude from his face. He hunches over like an old man --
but he is only 19 years old. "The way this sickness is -- you see me
now, but in a month I could be gone. It can take you down all of a
sudden," he says.

His kidneys are failing. They do not perform the essential function of
filtering waste from his body -- he's being poisoned from the inside.
When he got ill 2 years ago, he was already familiar with this disease
and how it might end. "I thought about my father and grandfather," he
says. Both died of the same condition. 3 of his brothers have it too.

All of them worked in the sugar cane fields.

Kidney disease has killed so many men here that locals now call their
community not simply La Isla -- which means "The Island" -- but La
Isla de las Viudas - "The Island of the Widows."

The epidemic extends far beyond Nicaragua. It's prevalent along the
Pacific coast of Central America -- across 6 countries.

"It is important that the chronic kidney disease (CKD) afflicting
thousands of rural workers in Central America be recognised as what it
is -- a major epidemic with a tremendous population impact," says
Victor Penchaszadeh, a clinical epidemiologist at Columbia University
in the US, and consultant to the Pan-American Health Organization on
chronic diseases in Latin America.

El Salvador's health minister recently called on the international
community for help. She said the epidemic is "wasting away our
populations."

Heat stress
-----------
At a health clinic in El Salvador, in the farming region of Bajo
Lempa, Dr Carlos Orantes recently found that a quarter of the men in
his area suffered from it. What's more, he says, most of the men who
are ill show no signs of high blood pressure or diabetes -- the most
common causes of CKD elsewhere in the world. "Most of the men we
studied have CKD from unknown causes," he says.

What the men in his area have in common is they all work in farming.
So Dr Orantes thinks a major cause of their kidney damage is the toxic
chemicals -- pesticides and herbicides -- that are routinely used here
in agriculture.

"These chemicals are banned in the United States, Europe, and Canada,
and they're used here, without any protection, and in large amounts
that are very concerning," he says.

But he's not ready to rule out other possible causes. For instance,
the overuse of painkillers can damage the kidneys, and so can drinking
too much alcohol. Both are major problems here, he says.

In Nicaragua, the disease has become a political issue.
In 2006, the World Bank gave a loan to Nicaragua's largest sugar
company to build an ethanol plant. Plantation workers filed a
complaint, saying the company's working conditions and use of
chemicals were fuelling the epidemic. They said the loan violated the
bank's own standards for worker safety and environmental practices. In
response, the bank agreed to fund a study to try to identify the cause
of the epidemic.

"The evidence points us most strongly to a hypothesis that heat stress
might be a cause of this disease," says Daniel Brooks of Boston
University, who is leading the research.

His team has found it's not just sugar cane workers who are falling
ill. Miners and port workers also suffer high rates of kidney disease,
yet they're not exposed to farm chemicals. What these men have in
common, he says, is they all work long hours in extreme heat.

"Day after day of hard manual labour in hot conditions -- without
sufficient replacement of fluids -- could lead to effects on the
kidney that are not obvious at first but over time accumulate to the
point that it enters into a diseased state," says Mr Brooks.

"This has never been so far shown to cause chronic kidney disease, so
we would be talking about a new mechanism that has not so far been
described in the scientific literature."

But Mr Brooks says a new preliminary study bolsters this hypothesis.
His team tested blood and urine from sugar cane workers who perform
different jobs. The scientists found more evidence of kidney damage in
the workers who have more strenuous jobs outside.

Professor Aurora Aragon of Nicaragua's National University in Leon
says this explanation makes sense. She's long suspected that part of
the problem is the way sugar cane workers are paid -- receiving more
money the more sugar cane they cut. "This way of working forces people
to do more than they are able to do, and this is not good for their
health," she says.

No alternative
--------------
"Working in the field made us feel dizzy and nauseous," says [a
worker] who cut sugar cane for 18 years. "We often had fevers." He now
has kidney disease and heads an organisation of sugar cane workers in
Nicaragua who are ill. He's convinced that something on the sugar
plantations is causing the sickness.

Whatever it is, he says, those who are ill need treatment with
dialysis -- which can keep them alive when their kidneys fail. But few
can get it because dialysis is extremely expensive and rarely
available.

"If you ask the ministry of health they say they don't have the money.
If you ask the sugar company if they are responsible, they say 'No'."

For their part, the sugar cane companies say they're not convinced
that farm chemicals or working conditions on their plantations are to
blame for the epidemic. Still, they say, they are trying to protect
their workers' health.

One conglomerate that owns several sugar plantations in Central
America -- the Pellas Group -- says it's started giving workers an
hour-long lunch break and now employs staff to make sure the men drink
water. The company also routinely tests its workers' kidney function.

Company spokesman Ariel Granera says if a worker is found to have
kidney disease, he is let go -- out of concern, says Mr Granera, for
his well-being. But the sick workers who have been dismissed say what
they receive from the companies and from social security isn't enough
to live on -- and when they lose their jobs, they lose the right to be
treated at company clinics.

In La Isla, and many other villages like it, the men often take jobs
with contractors who do not check for kidney disease.

Everyone fears that working in the sugar cane fields is a big risk,
but there are no other jobs around. "There is no alternative," says
one woman, who recently lost her father. "No other way to support a
family."

Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
----------------------------
CKD is often without any symptoms in the early stages, so many people
don't know they have it until the later stages, when symptoms include
anaemia (with weakness/breathlessness), bone disease, nausea, and
vomiting. Final-stage CKD patients may die without dialysis or a
kidney transplant.

In the developed world, the primary causes of CKD are diabetes and
high blood pressure, which are becoming more common as a result of
increasing obesity, lack of exercise, and high salt intake.

In the developing world, the main causes are chronic infections like
HIV, viral hepatitis, malaria, and tuberculosis.

[Byline: Kate Sheehy]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[It seems there is a kidney disease affecting the male workers in this
region. What seems to be in dispute is the cause and who is to care
for these workers. Clearly a lot more epidemiology regarding this
situation is needed.

It is impossible to comment regarding the toxicity, side effects, or
chemicals when the chemicals are not named in this or several other
articles.

We would certainly appreciate more information on this situation. -
Mod.TG]

[Maps of the region can be seen at
http://centralamerica.com/graphics/cmap1.gif and
http://healthmap.org/r/1obh. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

.................................................sb/tg/mj/dk
</body>
