<header id=008706>
Published Date: 2011-09-08 06:40:09 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Paramyxovirus, pigeons - Australia: (VI)
Archive Number: 20110908.2735
</header>
<body id=008706>
PARAMYXOVIRUS, PIGEONS - AUSTRALIA: (VICTORIA)
**********************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Wed 7 Sep 2011
Source: Adelaide Now [edited]
http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/virus-fears-for-south-australian-poultry/story-e6frea6u-1226130930844


South Australian (SA) poultry farmers fear a new poultry virus,
similar to strains found in China, may have a devastating impact on
their flocks.

The avian paramyxovirus has spread to Australia for the 1st time,
destroying entire pigeon flocks and worrying poultry farmers about the
implications for their birds.

Authorities have already urged pigeon fanciers to ground their pigeons
to help prevent the spread of the virus.

Biosecurity SA (South Australia) chief veterinary officer Rob Rahaley
yesterday [6 Sep 2-11] inspected about 500 pigeons -- all from South
Australia -- at the Royal Adelaide Show and passed them fit.

Dr Rahaley said the avian paramyxovirus is similar to the devastating
Newcastle disease in poultry and is previously unreported in
Australia.

It has killed 80-90 per cent of pigeons in 6 flocks of both racing and
show pigeons in the Shepparton district in northwestern Victoria and
Melbourne. The virus has led to a warning to SA pigeon owners to keep
their birds at home and restrict any movement of them in or out of the
state.

Dr Rahaley said while there had been no reports of the virus in South
Australian birds, the death of pigeons in northwestern Melbourne and
Shepparton posed the potential for the virus to be transmitted here.

"We're strongly advising pigeon fanciers to stop any movement of their
birds in connection with their hobby until further notice," Dr Rahaley
said.

"As virulent paramyxoviruses isolated from pigeons are capable of
infecting poultry, we're also advising producers to prevent any
contact between poultry, turkeys, emus, and ostriches, with wild birds
or pigeons, both indirectly and directly, for example via feed and
water.

Biosecurity SA will be monitoring the situation in Victoria and will
investigate any reports we receive in South Australia of birds
becoming ill."

Dr Rahaley said most commercial poultry flocks were vaccinated against
Newcastle disease and it would probably provide some safeguard.

"The major implication is to try and limit its spread within the
pigeon population and make sure that it doesn't cross into commercial
poultry," he said.

Bird owners who notice any unusual signs should contact the Animal
Disease Watch hotline on 1800 675 888.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Tue 6 Sep 2011
Source: The Age [edited]
http://www.theage.com.au/environment/animals/rare-pigeon-virus-can-spread-to-humans-20110906-1juqa.html


A rare virus that can be contracted by humans has killed a large
number of Victorian pigeons after being detected in Australia for the
1st time. A type of avian paramyxovirus has resulted in the deaths of
a number of hobby pigeon flocks.

Australian chief veterinary officer Dr Mark Schipp said the birds had
died suddenly in large numbers. The birds had sometimes appeared tired
or shown neurological signs such as circling or head flicking before
death. He said human infection was extremely rare and usually occurred
after contact with an infected bird.

"The virus causes only mild, short-term conjunctivitis or
influenza-like symptoms [in humans],'' Dr Schipp said.

"State veterinary authorities have been asked to review the health of
their pigeon and poultry flocks. At this stage, there are no reports
of this virus causing disease in wild birds, but we have asked the
Australian Wildlife Health Network to be alert to this possibility.''

Dr Schipp said the national Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal
Disease had met twice to discuss the outbreak, which is being managed
by Victorian chief veterinary officer Dr Hugh Millar and industry and
veterinary authorities.

Dr Schipp said the consultative committee has agreed to investigate
pigeon and other bird holdings where disease is suspected and to
quarantine affected properties.

Anyone concerned about their pigeons or birds should contact an
experienced poultry veterinarian, their local department of
agriculture, or the Emergency Animal Disease Watch hotline on 1800 675
888.

[Byline: Nino Bucci]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3]
Date: Wed 7 Sep 2011
Source: ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation) [edited]
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-09-06/victorian-bird-flu-breakout/2872478


Federal authorities have begun quarantining properties in Victoria
amid fears a deadly pigeon virus could spread to other birds. The
Agriculture Department is monitoring an outbreak of the avian
paramyxovirus, which has been detected for the 1st time in Australia,
among pigeons. The virus has already started killing some hobby birds
around Melbourne and in the north of the state at Shepparton.

The commercial poultry industry vaccinates chickens.

The Australian chief veterinary officer, Dr Mark Schipp says the
affected birds have died suddenly in large numbers and have sometimes
appeared tired or have shown neurological signs such as circling or
head flicking before death.

The bug can also cause conjunctivitis or influenza-like symptoms in
humans. But Dr Schipp says this is extremely rare and only usually
occurs in people who have had close direct contact with infected
birds.

Greater Melbourne Pigeon Federation spokesman John Cocks says measures
are being taken to stop its spread. "They (the Agriculture Department)
have the affected properties under quarantine," he said. "[It's] not
in racing pigeons that it has been detected in, it's only fancy
pigeons. And the problem is that we don't want it to get to the racing
pigeons. For them to just die like that would be a disaster."

Mr Cocks says bird owners are hopeful the virus can be contained. "For
us blokes, it would be devastating. I mean blokes pay a lot of money
for their pigeons -- thousands of dollars," he said.

"There is a vaccine available overseas, but it isn't available in
Australia."

Victoria's Department of Primary Industries (DPI) wants pigeon racing
to stop while it deals with the outbreak. The deputy chief veterinary
officer, Andrew Cameron, says it is strongly recommended that pigeon
races and shows are postponed.

"It is important at this stage that people are able to protect their
pigeons and I think the best way, if you've got a healthy flock, is by
not exposing them to other pigeons, while we're attempting to
determine the scope of the incident," he said.

The department says it is unlikely the virus will affect the
commercial poultry industry. Mr Cameron says the commercial chicken
flock is vaccinated against the disease. "We pretty much have a
protected commercial flock in relation to paramyxovirus."

The Minister for Agriculture and Food Security, Peter Walsh, says if
current vaccines are up to date, chickens should be protected.

"There is an issue for the poultry industry. They need to be very
careful of their biosecurity controls to make sure they keep wild
pigeons away from domestic fowls," he said. "So there's a low risk of
that being transferred into a breeding establishment."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[4]
Date: Tue 6 Sep 2011
Source: Xinhua News Agency [edited]
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/health/2011-09/06/c_131101771.htm


A rare virus that can be contracted by humans has killed a large
number of Victorian pigeons after being detected in the Australian
state for the 1st time, Agriculture Department confirmed on Tuesday [6
Sep 2011].

According to the Australian chief veterinary officer, Dr Mark Schipp,
the avian paramyxovirus has already started killing some hobby birds,
and threatens to spread to Victoria's chicken population.

He said the affected birds have died suddenly in large numbers and
have sometimes appeared tired or have shown neurological signs such as
circling or head flicking before death.

He added that the bug can also cause conjunctivitis or influenza-like
symptoms in humans. "The virus causes only mild, short-term
conjunctivitis or influenza-like symptoms (in humans)," Australia
Associated Press quoted Schipp as reporting on Tuesday [6 Sep 2011].
"Human infection with this virus is extremely rare and usually occurs
only in people who have close direct contact with infected birds."

At this stage, there are no reports of the virus causing disease in
wild birds, but the Australian Wildlife Health Network has been asked
to monitor the situation.

[Editor: Xiong Tong]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Australia can be seen at
http://healthmap.org/r/01qe. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

[Pigeon paramyxovirus type 1 (PPMV-1) is closely related to Newcastle
disease virus (NDV), as they are both classified in the same family of
viruses, _Paramyxoviridae_, and are within the same serotype, referred
to as paramyxovirus type 1. In spite of their close relationship,
there are clear antigenic (antibody stimulating) differences between
NDV and PPMV-1, which can only be determined by laboratory testing.

PPMV-1 was isolated for the 1st time from pigeons in the Middle East
in late 1970s and subsequently was introduced throughout North Africa.
The virus was reported in Italy in 1981 and from 1981 to 1984, spread
throughout the world. PPMV-1 has been isolated from pigeons, doves,
and ornamental birds in addition to commercial and feral pigeons. It
has been suggested that PPMV-1 is a variant form of NDV of chickens
and possibly emerged as a result of frequent transmission of the virus
from chickens to pigeons.

In 1984, a number of outbreaks in commercial poultry flocks in the UK,
with clinical signs such as drop in egg production, nervous signs, and
increased mortality were attributed to infection with PPMV-1.
Contamination of feed with pigeon feces and carcasses was considered
the main source of most of these outbreaks. However, in 2001, it was
speculated that a case of egg production drop in a commercial layer
flock in US was attributed to the contamination of the feed
ingredients with infected pigeon carcasses (PPMV-1 was isolated from
the pigeon carcasses but not from the layer flock), although this was
never proven.

Because of historical evidence that demonstrates the ability of some
pigeon-origin isolates of PPMV-1 to cause clinical disease in
commercial poultry flocks in other parts of the world (such as in
Europe, 1984), there is concern that these viruses might spread from
pigeons to commercial poultry flocks and cause clinical disease. There
have been a number of studies in the US that have assessed the
virulence of pigeon-origin PPMV-1 isolations in chickens under
experimental conditions.

To summarize, the PPMV-1 that has been increasingly isolated from
pigeon operations in Canada demands monitoring and appropriate
measures for 2 main reasons
- These viruses are able to cause disease and mortality in
non-vaccinated pigeons and result in losses to these operations, and
- If adequate biosecurity is not in place, there is a potential to
spread to commercial chicken and turkey flocks.

Even if the infection with the PPMV-1 isolates in commercial poultry
flocks is not causing overt clinical signs, it may provide an
opportunity for the virus to circulate in these flocks for an extended
period of time and based on available experimental studies,
potentially gain more ability to cause clinical signs and disease in
commercial poultry flocks in the future. The potential for this to
happen under field conditions is not known.

In order to minimize any potential risk of PPMV-1 in pigeon operations
and commercial poultry flocks, the following measures should be
considered:
- All suspect cases of disease in pigeons (especially those showing
nervous signs) should be monitored closely and proper diagnosis should
be sought in consultation with your veterinarian.
- Since pigeons can be infected with both PPMV-1 and exotic NDV,
isolates should be evaluated to make sure that they are not infected
with Exotic NDV. This can only be done at the laboratory.
- Since there is a possibility that non-vaccinated sick pigeons
infected with PPMV-1 may spread the infection to other pigeons and
possibly commercial poultry flocks, all commercial pigeon operations
should implement adequate vaccination programs against PPMV-1, to be
administered in consultation with your veterinarian. Correct age,
dose, and vaccine administration are important factors to induce
strong immunity in vaccinated birds and protect them against field
challenge.
- All pigeon operations should implement adequate biosecurity measures
as the PPMV-1, like NDV, is extremely contagious and can be spread to
other farms and lofts through infected birds, people, equipment,
clothing, and many other mechanical vectors.
- Owners of commercial poultry flocks should avoid any direct or
indirect contact with potentially infected pigeon operations and
practice adequate biosecurity measures. This is more important for
commercial flocks that are not commonly vaccinated against NDV.

The paramyxoviruses are an important cause of respiratory disease in
children. Illnesses include croup, bronchiolitis, and pneumonitis.

This group of viruses shares similar features; they possess a double
layered envelope with spikes, have a helical symmetry, and contain a
negative stranded RNA genome. An RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RDRP)
is contained within the virus particle. Paramyxoviruses replicate in
the cytoplasm and are released by budding. Virus-specific antigens
include those associated with the envelope and those contained within
the nucleocapsid.

The host range for the paramyxoviruses includes humans and monkeys.

These viruses produce multinucleated giant cells (syncytia) by
production of a cell fusing factor, and then cause host cell lysis.

One interesting note, Hendra virus is also in the _Paramyxoviridae_
grouping. I toss that trivial fact out because some one will decide it
came from the flying foxes. That cannot be true, but it is interesting
to note the number of _Paramyxoviridae_ manifestations in Australia
this year (2011).

Portions of this have been extracted from
http://www.cehs.siu.edu/fix/medmicro/param.htm and
http://www.thepoultrysite.com/articles/1366/pigeon-paramyxovirus-type-1-and-its-importance-for-the-commercial-poultry-industry.
- Mod.TG]
See Also
2003
----
Paramyxovirus infection, budgerigars - UK (susp.) (06) 20030813.2010
Paramyxovirus infection, budgerigars - UK (susp.) (05) 20030726.1827
Paramyxovirus infection, budgerigars - UK (susp.) (04) 20030724.1802
Paramyxovirus infection, budgerigars - UK (susp.) (03) 20030703.1639
Paramyxovirus infection, budgerigars - UK (susp.) (02) 20030627.1584
Paramyxovirus infection, budgerigars - UK (susp.) 20030620.1517
2001
----
Paramyxoviruses, emergent, relationships 20010719.1404
Paramyxoviruses, new human pathogen - Netherlands 20010603.1094
1999
----
Paramyxovirus, bat urine - Malaysia 19991023.1906
1998
----
Paramyxovirus, new? - Australia 19980404.0618
Paramyxovirus, pigs - Australia (New South Wales) (02) 19980302.0401
1997
----
Paramyxovirus, pigs - Australia (New South Wales) 19971006.2104
.................................................sb/arn/tg/mj/dk
</body>
