<header id=053325>
Published Date: 2009-09-04 15:00:04 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (39): pediatric deaths
Archive Number: 20090904.3118
</header>
<body id=053325>
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC (H1N1) 2009 (39): PEDIATRIC DEATHS
*****************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Fri 4 Sep 2009
Source: MMWR Weekly, Fri 4 Sep 2009 / 58(34);941-947 [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5834a1.htm?s_cid=mm5834a1_e>


Surveillance for Pediatric Deaths Associated with 2009 Pandemic
Influenza A (H1N1) Virus Infection -- United States, April to August
2009
-------------------------------------------------------------
Children aged less than 5 years or with certain chronic medical
conditions are at increased risk for complications and death from
influenza (1--3). Because of this increased risk, the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) has prioritized influenza
prevention and treatment for children aged less than 5 years and for
those with certain chronic medical and immunosuppressive conditions
(4,5). CDC monitors child influenza deaths through its
influenza-associated pediatric mortality reporting system. As of 8 Aug
2009, CDC had received reports of 477 deaths associated with 2009
pandemic influenza A (H1N1) in the United States, including 36 deaths
among children aged less than 18 years. To characterize these cases,
CDC analyzed data from April to August 2009. The results of that
analysis indicated that, of 36 children who died, 7 (19 percent) were
aged less than 5 years, and 24 (67 percent) had one or more of the
high-risk medical conditions. 22 (92 percent) of the 24 children with
high-risk medical conditions had neurodevelopmental conditions. Among
23 children with culture or pathology results reported,
laboratory-confirmed bacterial coinfections were identified in 10 (43
percent), including all 6 children who 1) were aged greater than or
equal to 5 years, 2) had no recognized high-risk condition, and 3) had
culture or pathology results reported. Early diagnosis of influenza
can enable prompt initiation of antiviral therapy for children who are
at greater risk or severely ill. Clinicians also should be aware of
the potential for severe bacterial coinfections among children
diagnosed with influenza and treat accordingly. All children aged
greater than or equal to 6 months and caregivers of children aged less
than 6 months should receive influenza A (H1N1) 2009 monovalent
vaccine when available (6).

Influenza-associated pediatric deaths have been nationally notifiable
since October 2004. The CDC case reporting system defines an
influenza-associated pediatric death as a death in a person aged less
than 18 years with an illness clinically compatible with influenza and
whose influenza is laboratory confirmed. State and local health
departments report influenza-associated pediatric deaths using a
standardized case report form that collects information on
demographics, dates of illness onset and death, location of death,
chronic medical conditions, influenza testing, bacteria or fungi
cultured from sterile and nonsterile sites, and medical care received
during the influenza illness. The case report form provides a list of
chronic medical conditions that have been associated previously with
an increased risk for complications from seasonal influenza and space
to describe additional chronic medical conditions not listed on the
form. Results of pathology testing conducted at CDC also are included.
Medical records, medical examiner reports, and death certificates were
not reviewed.

This case series included data reported to CDC on all deaths
associated with laboratory-confirmed 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1)
virus infection occurring in persons aged less than 18 years through 8
Aug 2009. Laboratory confirmation was defined as a positive test for
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). CDC requested
supplementary information from state and local health departments on
antiviral treatment and chronic medical conditions for deaths
associated with 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection. For
this case series, invasive bacterial coinfection was defined as
laboratory detection of a bacterial pathogen in a specimen from a
normally sterile site or a postmortem lung biopsy. Children were
considered at high risk if they were aged less than 5 years or had one
of the medical conditions recognized to increase the risk for
influenza-related complications,* based on a review of the available
medical data by a developmental pediatrician.

36 pediatric deaths associated with 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1)
infection were reported from 15 state and local health authorities**
through 8 Aug 2009 (data tabulated in the original text and available
at:
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5834a1.htm?s_cid=mm5834a1_e>).
Illness onsets occurred during 9 May-20 Jul 2009, and deaths occurred
during 15 May-28 Jul 2009; 6 deaths occurred in May, 25 in June, and 5
deaths in July 2009. Median age of the patients was 9 years (range: 2
months-17 years); 50 percent were male, 42 percent were non-Hispanic
white, and 33 percent were Hispanic (data tabulated in the original
text). Seven (19 percent) of the 36 children were aged less than 5
years (5 were aged less than 2 years), and 24 (67 percent) had at
least one high-risk medical condition, including 3 children aged less
than 5 years. Among the 24 children with high-risk medical conditions,
22 (92 percent) had neurodevelopmental conditions (e.g., developmental
delay or cerebral palsy). Of these 22 children, 13 (59 percent) had
more than one neurodevelopmental diagnosis, and 9 (41 percent) had
neurodevelopmental and chronic pulmonary conditions. Eight (22
percent) of the 36 children were aged greater than or equal to 5 years
with no reported high-risk conditions. Two of these 8 children were
reported as obese; however, height and weight measurements were not
reported.

Duration of illness before death in the 36 cases ranged from one day
to 28 days (median: 6 days). Among 31 children for whom antiviral
treatment data were available, 19 (61 percent) received antiviral
treatment, and 4 of those received treatment within 2 days of illness
onset. Of 25 children for whom information was available, 13 (52
percent) had received at least one dose of the 2008-09 seasonal
influenza vaccine, including 11 children with high-risk medical
conditions. Of the 23 children with culture or pathology results
reported, 10 (43 percent) had a laboratory-confirmed bacterial
coinfection, including _Staphylococcus aureus_ (5, including 3
methicillin-resistant _S. aureus_), _Streptococcus pneumoniae_ (3),
_Streptococcus pyogenes_ (one), and _Streptococcus constellatus_
(one). Among the 8 children aged greater than or equal to 5 years who
did not have a high-risk medical condition, 6 had a
laboratory-confirmed invasive bacterial coinfection, including 4 with
_S. aureus_; the other 2 children either had no specimens collected or
information regarding bacterial coinfection was unavailable. Among the
7 children aged less than 5 years who died, 2 had a
laboratory-confirmed bacterial coinfection; neither child had a
high-risk medical condition.

MMWR Editorial Note:

28 (78 percent) of the 36 children whose deaths were associated with
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection were in at least one
of 2 groups previously found to be at increased risk for complications
from seasonal influenza: children aged less than 5 years and those
with a high-risk chronic medical condition (1-3). The percentage of
children with high-risk medical conditions (67 percent) in this series
is higher than the percentage reported in recent influenza seasons.
During the 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06, and 2006-07 seasons, a total of
153, 47, 46, and 73 pediatric deaths were reported through the
influenza-associated pediatric mortality reporting system,
respectively. During those seasons, the percentages of children with
high-risk medical conditions were 47 percent, 55 percent, 48 percent,
and 35 percent, respectively (1,7). During the same seasons, among
children who died, the percentages of children aged less than 5 years
and aged less than 2 years among pediatric deaths was generally higher
(less than 5 years, 42 percent-63 percent, less than 2 years, 26
percent-46 percent) than the 19 percent and 14 percent, respectively,
reported for 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1). Continued surveillance
is needed to determine whether these and other differences between
pediatric deaths from seasonal influenza and deaths from 2009 pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) are important.

Notably, among children with high-risk medical conditions, 92 percent
had neurodevelopmental conditions (e.g., developmental delay or
cerebral palsy), a finding consistent with the results from a study of
influenza-associated mortality during the 2003-04 influenza season
(1). In 2005, that finding helped lead to the addition of
neurodevelopmental conditions to ACIP's list of conditions that should
prompt seasonal influenza prevention and treatment (8). The findings
from this report indicate that most of the children with
neurodevelopmental conditions who died had multiple neurodevelopmental
diagnoses and/or comorbid pulmonary conditions. Health-care providers
should be aware of the potential for severe influenza illness,
including death, in these children.

This report also highlights the prominence of laboratory-confirmed
bacterial coinfections, which were identified in 10 (43 percent) of
the 23 children who had culture or pathology results reported. All 6
children who were aged greater than or equal to 5 years, did not have
a high-risk medical condition, and had culture or pathology results
reported had an invasive bacterial coinfection, suggesting that
bacterial infection, in combination with 2009 pandemic influenza A
(H1N1) virus infection, can result in severe disease in children who
might be otherwise healthy. Clinicians should be aware of the
potential for severe bacterial coinfections among children diagnosed
with influenza and treat accordingly. As always, diagnostic testing
and susceptibility testing of bacterial isolates are important to
guide antibiotic therapy. Empiric antibacterial therapy, when
indicated, should be directed at likely pathogens associated with
influenza, such as _S. aureus_, _S. pneumoniae_, and _S. pyogenes_
(1,7). In addition, all children should be current on recommended
vaccinations, including 7-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine.
Children aged greater than or equal to 2 years with certain high-risk
medical conditions are recommended to receive the 23-valent
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine in accordance with guidance.

Although the majority of children in this case series received
antiviral treatment, few received treatment within 2 days of illness
onset. Influenza antiviral treatment is recommended for persons with
suspected or laboratory-confirmed influenza who are hospitalized or
who are at greater risk for influenza-related complications. If a
child is not in a high-risk group or is not hospitalized, health-care
providers should use clinical judgment to guide treatment decisions.
When evaluating children, clinicians should be aware that the risk for
severe complications from seasonal influenza among children aged less
than 5 years is highest among children aged less than 2 years.
Antiviral treatment should be started as soon as possible after
illness onset; evidence for benefits from antiviral treatment in
studies of seasonal influenza is strongest when treatment is started
within 48 hours of illness onset (5). However, treatment of any person
with influenza who requires hospitalization !
is recommended, even if treatment is started more than 48 hours after
illness onset. Health-care providers should be aware that although
specificity is high, sensitivity of rapid influenza tests to detect
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection is low (9);
therefore, a negative test result does not exclude 2009 pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) virus infection.

The findings in this report are subject to at least 5 limitations.
1st, influenza-associated pediatric deaths might be under ascertained
because of a low level of influenza testing among children or under
reporting of diagnosed cases. 2nd, differences in case ascertainment
limit the direct comparability of the findings in this report with
findings from reports for seasonal influenza. All patients in this
series were identified as having 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1)
virus infection using RT-PCR, but surveillance for pediatric deaths
associated with seasonal influenza includes cases ascertained by
various diagnostic tests, some of which are less sensitive than
RT-PCR. 3rd, some chronic medical conditions might be under reported
in the case reporting system because they are not specifically listed
on the case report form; however, the collection of supplementary data
on chronic medical conditions from state and local health authorities
might have helped to minimize this potential bias. 4th, incomplete
data on antiviral treatment and testing for invasive bacterial
coinfections might have led to some children being misclassified.
Finally, because medical records were not reviewed, the severity of
neurodevelopmental conditions, including the degree of associated
respiratory impairment, could not be characterized.

Vaccination is the primary strategy to prevent influenza and related
complications. Persons aged 6 months-24 years and persons who live
with or provide care for infants aged less than 6 months are
recommended for vaccination against 2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1)
virus infection (6). Initial doses of influenza A (H1N1) 2009
monovalent vaccine are expected to become available in mid-October
2009. Guidance from CDC regarding administration of vaccine, antiviral
treatment, management of influenza-associated bacterial complications,
and other prevention and control measures for 2009 pandemic influenza
A (H1N1) will be updated as needed. Health-care providers can find
current recommendations online at <http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu>.

References
----------
(1) Bhat N, Wright JG, Broder KR, et al. Influenza-associated deaths
among children in the United States, 2003-2004. N Engl J Med
2005;353:2559--67.
(2) Keren R, Zaoutis TE, Bridges CB, et al. Neurological and
neuromuscular disease as a risk factor for respiratory failure in
children hospitalized with influenza infection. JAMA 2005;294:2188--94.
(3) Coffin SE, Zaoutis TE, Rosenquist AB, et al. Incidence,
complications, and risk factors for prolonged stay in children
hospitalized with community-acquired influenza. Pediatrics
2007;119:740--8.
(4) CDC. Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP), 2009. MMWR 2009;58(No. RR-8).
(5) CDC. Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2008. MMWR
2008;57(No. RR-7).
(6) CDC. Use of influenza A (H1N1) 2009 monovalent vaccine. MMWR
2009;58(No. RR-10).
(7) Finelli L, Fiore A, Dhara R, et al. Influenza-associated pediatric
mortality in the United States: increase of Staphylococcus aureus
coinfection. Pediatrics 2009;122:805--11.
(8) CDC. Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2005. MMWR
2005;54(No. RR-8).
(9) CDC. Evaluation of rapid influenza diagnostic tests for detection
of novel influenza A (H1N1) virus---United States, 2009. MMWR
2009;58:826--9.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[20 (78 percent) of the 36 children whose deaths were associated with
2009 pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection were in at least one
of 2 groups previously found to be at increased risk for complications
from seasonal influenza: children aged less than 5 years and those
with a high-risk chronic medical condition. Notably, among children
with high-risk medical conditions, 92 percent had neurodevelopmental
conditions (e.g., developmental delay or cerebral palsy). The findings
from this report indicate that most of the children with
neurodevelopmental conditions who died had multiple neurodevelopmental
diagnoses and/or comorbid pulmonary conditions. This report also
highlights the prominence of laboratory-confirmed bacterial
coinfections, which were identified in 10 (43 percent) of the 23
children who had culture or pathology results reported. Clinicians
should be aware of the potential for severe bacterial coinfections
among children diagnosed with influenza and treat accordingly.
Antiviral treatment should be started as soon as possible after
illness onset; evidence for benefits from antiviral treatment in
studies of seasonal influenza is strongest when treatment is started
within 48 hours of illness onset. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (38): 10 S.Amer. presidents exposed
20090831.3063
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (37): 2nd wave plan, WHO 20090830.3042
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (36): USA (IL), NZ 20090828.3032
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (35): NZ surveillance 20090827.3022
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (30): assumptions 20090813.2879
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (20): Peru, 33 percent asymptomatic
20090730.2668
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (10): vaccine 20090720.2577
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 - Viet Nam: patient data 20090708.2450
........................................cp/msp/jw
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
