<header id=022573>
Published Date: 2010-12-06 11:00:04 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Prion disease update 2010 (11)
Archive Number: 20101206.4364
</header>
<body id=022573>
PRION DISEASE UPDATE 2010 (11)
******************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[With the continuing decline of the number of cases in the human
population of variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease -- abbreviated
previously as vCJD or CJD (new var.) in ProMED-mail -- it has been
decided to broaden the scope of the occasional ProMED-mail updates to
include other prion-related diseases. In addition to vCJD, data on
other forms of CJD: sporadic, iatrogenic, familial, and GSS
(Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease) are included also since they
may have some relevance to the incidence and etiology of vCJD. - Mod.CP]

In this update:
[1] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - monthly statistics as of Mon
6 Dec 2010 - no new vCJD cases
[2] France: Institut de Veille Sanitaire - monthly statistics as of
Wed 1 Dec 2010 - no new vCJD cases
[3] USA: National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center -
cumulative case numbers for 2010 up to 1 Nov 2010 - no vCJD cases
[4] Probable vCJD - Taiwan ex UK
[5] The 7 threats
[6] Animal feed bans: emerging disease consideration

******
[1] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - monthly statistics as of Mon
6 Dec 2010 - no new vCJD cases
Date: Mon 6 Dec 2010
Source: UK National CJD Surveillance Unit, monthly statistics [edited]
<http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/figures.htm>


The number of deaths due to definite or probable vCJD cases remains
170. A total of 4 definite/probable patients are still alive so the
total number of definite or probable vCJD cases remains 174.

Although 3 new deaths due to vCJD were recorded in 2009 and now 3
deaths in 2010 so far, the overall picture is still consistent with
the view that the vCJD outbreak in the UK is in decline, albeit now
with a pronounced tail. The 1st cases were observed in 1995, and the
peak number of deaths was 28 in the year 2000, followed by 20 in
2001, 17 in 2002, 18 in 2003, 9 in 2004, 5 in 2005, 5 in 2006, 5 in
2007, one in 2008, 3 in 2009, and now 3 so far in 2010.

Totals for all types of CJD cases in the UK so far in the year 2010
-------------------------------------------------------------------
During the 1st 11 months of 2010, there have been 136 referrals, 66
fatal cases of sporadic CJD, 3 fatal cases of vCJD, 2 cases of
iatrogenic CJD, 3 cases of familial CJD, and one case of GSS.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] France: Institut de Veille Sanitaire - monthly statistics as of
Wed 1 Dec 2010 - no new vCJD cases
Date: Wed 1 Dec 2010
Source: IVS - Maladie de Creutzfeldt-Jakob et maladies apparentees
[in French, trans. & summ. Mod.CP, edited]
<http://www.invs.sante.fr/display/?doc=publications/mcj/donnees_mcj.html>


During the 1st 11 months of 2010, there were 1446 referrals, 87
confirmed cases of sporadic CJD, 6 cases of familial CJD, and no
cases of iatrogenic CJD or vCJD.

A total of 25 cases of confirmed or probable vCJD have been recorded
in France since records began in 1992. There was 1 case in 1996, 1 in
2000, 1 in 2001, 3 in 2002, 2 in 2004, 6 in 2005, 6 in 2006, 3 in
2007, 2 in 2009, and none so far in 2010.

The 25 confirmed cases comprise 13 females and 12 males. All 25 are
now deceased. Their median age is 37 (between 19 and 58). 7 were
resident in the Ile-de-France and 18 in the provinces. All the
identified cases have been Met-Met homozygotes. No risk factor has
been identified. One of the 25 had made frequent visits to the United
Kingdom, during about 10 years from 1987.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3] USA: National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center -
cumulative case numbers for 2010 up to 1 Nov 2010 - no vCJD cases
Date: Mon 1 Nov 2010
Source: US National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center [edited]
<http://www.cjdsurveillance.com/pdf/case-table.pdf>


Cumulative data 1 Jan 2010 to 31 October 2010
---------------------------------------------
During the 10-month period 1 Jan 2010 to 31 Oct 2010, there were 333
referrals, 213 of whom were classified as prion disease cases,
comprising 158 cases of sporadic CJD, 33 of familial CJD, and none of
iatrogenic CJD or vCJD.

Overall of 3831 referrals examined since screening began in 1996 or
thereabouts, diagnosis is still pending in 18 cases, and another 18
cases have been considered inconclusive. [This is a measure of the
difficulty in achieving unequivocal diagnoses. - Mod.CP]

During the same period a total of 2265 prion disease cases have been
screened, a figure which includes 23 (22 during 2010) cases with type
determination pending, but in which a diagnosis of vCJD has been
excluded. 3 cases of vCJD recorded in the USA during the same period
have been attributed to infection in the United Kingdom in 2 cases,
and in Saudi Arabia in the other.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[4] Probable vCJD - Taiwan ex UK
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 2010
Source: Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences [edited]
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1440-1819.2010.02151.x/abstract>


[Ref: Yang CW, Fuh JL, Wang SJ, et al: Probable variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in Asia: A case report from Taiwan and
review of two prior cases. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
64(6): 652-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1819.2010.02151.x. published online
25 Nov 2010]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract
--------
New variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) was first identified in
the UK in 1996, and was causally linked to bovine spongiform
encephalopathy. Herein we report the 1st case of vCJD in Taiwan: a
34-year-old man who had lived in the UK between 1989 and 1997. The
patient presented with depression, irritability, personality change,
painful feet, and allodynia, followed by gait ataxia and cognitive
impairment. Electroencephalograms did not show the typical appearance
of sporadic CJD. The cerebrospinal fluid 14-3-3 protein immunoassay
was negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed high signal
lesions involving bilateral caudate nuclei, left lentiform nucleus,
bilateral dorsomedial thalami, and pulvinar on fluid-attenuation
inversion recovery, T2- and diffusion-weighted imaging. Prion protein
gene analysis showed homozygous for methionine at codon 129. The
patient developed akinetic mutism at 16 months and died at 28 months
after onset. The clinical presentation and neuroimaging findings were
compatible with the vCJD cases reported since 1996, and met the World
Health Organization case definition for probable vCJD. In this
communication, we also review 2 other cases of vCJD in Asia. All 3
cases were assumed as imported cases from the UK because of the
residential or travel history of the patients.

[If this case of vCJD is independently verified it will increase the
global total number of cases to 218; see,
<http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/vcjdworld.htm>.

However, previously CJ Lu, Y Sun, and SS Chen reported in the
European Journal of Epidemiology 2010; 25(5): 341-7
(<http://www.springerlink.com/content/150215ht76333700/>) the results
of a prospective 10-year study of incidence of Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease in Taiwan. No vCJD was recorded in this survey:

"This study was performed to estimate the incidence of
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) in Taiwan from 1998 to 2007.
Suspected cases of CJD were reported to the Taiwan Creutzfeldt-Jakob
Disease Surveillance Unit, a nationwide, hospital-based case report
system initiated since 1996 to prospectively conduct a CJD
epidemiological study. Consecutive patients who met the diagnostic
criteria recommended by the World Health Organization were enrolled.
The clinical information of each suspected case was collected and
case ascertainment was performed by an expert committee. A total of
123 sporadic CJD were identified without any iatrogenic or new
variant CJD cases. The overall annual incidence rate (95 percent CI)
was 0.55 (0.46-0.65) cases per million person-year. There was no
statistically significant difference between the calendar year of
disease onset (P = 0.97). The incidence rates were not significantly
different between women and men (P = 0.63). Age was the main factor
for the risk of CJD (P less than 0.0001). Age-specific incidence rate
increased after the age of 40 years with the peak being in the 70-79
years age group. Our data showed low annual incidence rate and high
frequency of methionine homozygous prion protein genotype of sCJD in
Taiwan. This report provided important epidemiological data on ethnic Chinese."

It has been noted previously that a high frequency of methionine
homozygosity is characteristic also of the general population in
Japan in contrast to the 33 percent approximately in the UK
population; see, Prion disease update (09) 20101006.3622. - Mod.CP]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[5] The 7 threats
Date: Mon 3 May 2010 [accessed 6 Dec 2010]
Source: NeuroPrion Network [edited]
<http://www.neuroprion.org/en/np-neuroprion.html>


Seven main threats for the future linked to prions
-----------------------------------------------------------
The NeuroPrion network has identified 7 main threats for the future
linked to prions.

1st threat
----------
The TSE [transmissible spongiform encephalopathy] road map defining
the evolution of European policy for protection against prion
diseases is based on a certain numbers of hypotheses some of which
may turn out to be erroneous. In particular, a form of BSE (called
atypical bovine spongiform encephalopathy), recently identified by
systematic testing in aged cattle without clinical signs, may be the
origin of classical BSE and thus potentially constitute a reservoir,
which may be impossible to eradicate if a sporadic origin is
confirmed. Also, a link is suspected between atypical BSE and some
apparently sporadic cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans.
These atypical BSE cases constitute an unforeseen 1st threat that
could sharply modify the European approach to prion diseases.

2nd threat
----------
In small ruminants, a new atypical form of scrapie currently
represents up to 50 percent of detected cases and even involves sheep
selected for resistance to classical scrapie. The consequences for
animal and human health are still unknown and there may be a
potential connection with atypical BSE. These atypical scrapie cases
constitute a 2nd threat not envisioned previously which could deeply
modify the European approach to prion diseases.

3rd threat
----------
The species barrier between human and cattle might be weaker than
previously expected and the risk of transmission of prion diseases
between different species has been notoriously unpredictable. The
emergence of new atypical strains in cattle and sheep together with
the spread of chronic wasting disease in cervids renders the
understanding of the species barrier critical. This constitutes a 3rd
threat not properly envisioned previously that could deeply modify
the European approach to prion diseases.

4th threat
----------
Prion infectivity has now been detected in blood, urine, and milk and
this has potential consequences on risk assessments for the
environment and food as well as for contamination of surfaces
including medical instruments. Furthermore the procedures recommended
for decontamination of MBM (meat and bone meal), which are based on
older methodologies not designed for this purpose, have turned out to
be of very limited efficacy and compromise current policies
concerning the reuse of these high value protein supplements
(cross-contamination of feed circuits are difficult to control). It
should be noted that the destruction or very limited use of MBM is
estimated to still cost Euro 1 billion [approx USD 1.3 billion] per
year to the European economy, whereas other countries, including the
US, Brazil, and Argentina do not have these constraints. However,
many uncertainties remain concerning the guarantees that can be
reasonably provided for food and feed safety and scientific knowledge
about the causative agents (prions) will continue to evolve. This
decontamination and environmental issue is a 4th threat that could
modify deeply the European approach to prion diseases.

5th threat
----------
The precise nature of prions remains elusive. Very recent data
indicate that abnormal prion protein (PrPTSE) can be generated from
the brains of normal animals, and under some conditions (including
contaminated waste water) PrPTSE can be destroyed whereas the BSE
infectious titre remains almost unchanged, a finding that underlines
the possibility of having BSE without any detectable diagnostic
marker. These are just 2 areas of our incomplete knowledge of the
fundamental biology of prions which constitute a 5th threat to the
European approach to prion diseases.

6th threat
----------
The absence of common methods and standardisation in the evaluation
of multiple in vivo models with different prion strains and different
transgenic mice expressing PrP from different species (different
genotypes of cattle, sheep, cervids, etc) renders a complete and
comprehensive analysis of all the data generated by the different
scientific groups almost impossible. This deeply impairs risk
assessment. Moreover, the possibility of generating PrPTSE de novo
with new powerful techniques has raised serious questions about their
appropriateness for use as blood screening tests. The confusion about
an incorrect interpretation of positive results obtained by these
methods constitutes a 6th threat to European approach to prion diseases.

7th threat
----------
The detection of new or re-emerging prion diseases in animals or
humans which could lead to a new crisis in consumer confidence over
the relaxation of precautionary measures and surveillance programmes
constitutes a 7th threat that could modify the European approach to
prion diseases.

--
Communicated by:
Terry S Singeltary Sr
<flounder9@verizon.net>

******
[6] Animal feed bans: emerging disease consideration
Date: December 2010
Source: International Forum For Transmissible Animal Diseases and
Food Safety (TAFS), Berne, Switzerland [summ., edited]
<http://www.tafsforum.org/position_papers/TAFS_POSITION_PAPER_ON_RELAXATION_OF_FEED_BAN_2010_v2.pdf>


[The following are extracts from a comprehensive document entitled:
'Position Paper on Relaxation of the Feed Ban in the European Union
[EU]'. These extracts are relevant to food safety considerations, and
also provide a convenient review of emerging disease possibilities.

Interested readers are recommended to read the full text and access
the references cited in the text via the source URL above. - Mod.CP]

Feed bans in the European Union
-------------------------------
Epidemiological evidence implicated contaminated rendered meat and
bone meal as the source of the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy]
epidemic in the United Kingdom, continental Europe, as well as a few
other countries around the world. With the overall global decline of
BSE cases, national governments are beginning to explore the
possibility of relaxing some of the measures taken to bring the
disease under control. This report examines the current scientific
knowledge that may impact decisions regarding the feed bans.

Introduction and background
---------------------------
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy was first identified in cattle in
1986 in the United Kingdom (UK) (Ref 1), from where it subsequently
spread, first to other European countries and later to additional
countries worldwide (Ref 2). By 1988, epidemiological evidence
suggested that infection was transmitted between cattle by oral
ingestion of infectious animal proteins derived from infected cattle
that were rendered and included in feed (Ref 3). Following this
finding, the feeding of ruminant proteins to ruminants was prohibited
in the UK. However, evidence demonstrated that this feed ban was not
fully effective in preventing new infections. Therefore, over the
following years, increasingly more restrictive feed bans were
implemented in the UK and the European Union (EU).

The 1st feed ban for the entirety of the EU was not implemented until
1994, when the feeding of mammalian proteins to ruminants was
prohibited. Some national governments took their own actions to
implement restrictions prior to the 1994 prohibition. In 2001, this
feed ban was extended to include the feeding of all processed animal
proteins (PAPs) to all farmed animals. Only very few exceptions were
allowed under strict conditions, including the use of fishmeal for
non-ruminants and the use of blood meal derived from non-ruminants
for fish feed (Ref 4).

Both in the UK and in the rest of the EU it was found that these
total feed bans for all farmed animals were the only option to
prevent the intentional or unintentional inclusion of ruminant
protein in ruminant feed in the feed production process, and to
exclude the possibility of on-farm cross-feeding of ruminants with
non-ruminant feed containing ruminant proteins. This extreme
zero-tolerance level was necessary because it was determined that
cattle could be infected by as little as 1 mg of infectious tissue in
their feed (Ref 5). Minimal levels of cross-contamination of ruminant
feed with infectious materials could therefore be sufficient to cause
new infections in cattle.

In addition to the feed bans, European Union countries also required
that rendering be conducted under the conditions of 133 deg C [271.4
deg F], 3 bars of pressure for 20 minutes, and prohibited the
inclusion of certain specified risk materials (SRMs) which had to be
completely destroyed.

The number of BSE cases has dropped significantly in the UK and
continental Europe since the beginning of active surveillance in
2001. Very few BSE cases have been born after the 2001 feed ban, and
the number of cases born after 2001 continues to decrease. At the
same time, the average age at slaughter of detected BSE cases
continues to increase, indicating that the exposure of the animal
occurred at a time point prior to the expanded ban (Ref 10). These
data suggest that the total feed bans (1996 in the UK and 2001 in the
rest of the EU) have been effective in significantly attenuating if
not eliminating the BSE epidemic in the EU.

Since the implementation of the feed ban in 2001, 3 significant
changes have been made to the relevant Regulation 999/2001, which
took into consideration the increased knowledge about BSE and BSE
infectivity in different tissues. As a consequence, relaxations of
the feed ban were allowed in 2 cases, but in a 3rd case the feed ban
was further tightened.

Feed bans outside of Europe
---------------------------
After confirming BSE in September 2001, the government of Japan
enacted many of the same regulations adopted by the European Union.
In regard to feed controls, all meat and bone meal (MBM) is
prohibited from being fed to bovines. Porcine and marine mammal
derived MBM is banned from the rations of pigs and chickens as well.
MBM from poultry produced separately may be fed to pigs and chickens.
(Ref 13). To date, with the exception of one case born in January
2002, all other BSE cases have been born prior to the feed ban.

BSE has also been identified in both Canada and the United States
(US). The 1st case of BSE in Canada was reported in May 2003 and the
1st native-born case in the US was identified in 2004. Both Canada
and the US prohibited the feeding of most rendered mammalian proteins
to ruminants in 1997. It is evident by the Canadian BSE cases born
between 2000-04 that this was not 100 percent effective. As of
October 2009, the US expanded the 1997 feed ban to prohibit the
feeding of certain high risk cattle materials in all animal feed.
This list includes: 1) the entire carcass of BSE-positive cattle, 2)
the brains and spinal cords from cattle 30 months of age and older,
3) the entire carcass of cattle not inspected and passed for human
consumption, unless the cattle are less than 30 months of age or the
brains and spinal cords have been effectively removed, 4) tallow
derived from BSE-positive cattle, 5) tallow derived from cattle
material prohibited in animal feed (CMPAF) that contains more than
0.15 percent insoluble impurities, and 6) mechanically separated beef
derived from CMPAF.

Many countries not reporting BSE have taken some precautionary feed
control measures to prevent an internal recycling of the BSE agent if
it were to be introduced into the animal feed chain. The measures
usually include a ruminant to ruminant or mammalian to ruminant ban.
Some countries have also excluded SRMs from animal feed and set
parameters for rendering. For example, as of 2001 Australia prohibits
the feeding of any material taken from a vertebrate animal other than
tallow, gelatin, milk products, or oils extracted from poultry and
fish. It includes rendered products such as blood meal, meat meal,
meat and bone meal, fish meal, poultry meal, feather meal, and
compounded feeds made from these products to be fed to ruminants. In
2002 Argentina enacted a mammalian to ruminant ban.

Feed bans in Europe: future policy
----------------------------------
Recognizing the successes in the control efforts for BSE, in 2005 the
European Commission (EC) published the TSE Roadmap (Ref 14). This
Roadmap laid out the short, medium, and long term strategic goals of
the EC in relation to TSE control measures. For the feed ban, the
Roadmap defined the strategic goal as the relaxation of certain
measures when certain conditions are met. In particular, 4 issues
requiring re-consideration were identified: presence of bone
fragments in sugar beet pulp and other feeding stuffs; presence of
fish meal in milk replacer for ruminants; lifting feed ban provisions
for non-ruminants; possible need for future provisions on tallow.

Emerging disease considerations
-------------------------------
Atypical BSE
------------
For almost the entire 2 decades that BSE had been known in the world
it was thought that there was only one "strain" that infected cattle
and caused disease in other species such as humans (Refs. 17, 18).
But in 2004, cases of a bovine prion disease molecularly different
than those already documented as classical BSE were described by
scientists in both Italy (Ref 18) and France (Ref 19). In both
countries the cattle were over 8 years of age. The Italian cases (11
and 15 years of age) named bovine amyloidotic spongiform
encephalopathy (BASE) were characterized by an unglycosylated protein
band with a lower molecular mass (thus named L cases) and the
predominance of the monoglycosylated band. In addition,
immunohistochemical detection of PrPres in these cases found greater
deposits in the cerebral cortex and thalamus versus the brain stem,
as is characteristic of classical BSE.

The French cases found a higher molecular mass associated with the
unglycosylated protein band and were called H cases. The different
"strains" are now called atypical BSE. Atypical BSE is a study in
progress with more unknowns than knowns. One of the most important of
the unknowns is the significance of atypical BSE in regard to human
and animal health.

Since these 2 publications, additional cases of atypical BSE have
been found in other countries. H cases have been detected in Canada,
France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. L cases have been
diagnosed in Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
and Poland.

It has now been shown that both the L and H types of atypical BSE are
experimentally transmissible via the intracerebral route. Homogenates
from L cases have been transmitted to wild-type mice, bovinized,
ovinized, and humanized transgenic mice, Cynomolgus monkeys and
cattle (Refs. 20, 21, and 22). H cases have been transmitted to
bovinized transgenic (Tgbov) and ovinized transgenic mice (Ref 23)
and cattle (personal communication March 2009). Early studies provide
some evidence that L type (or BASE) BSE may be more virulent for
primates including humans (Refs. 21, 24, and 25).

Studies on the oral route are underway. These would provide data to
evaluate the potential for natural transmission of the disease.
Atypical BSE may arise spontaneously in a small proportion of cattle.
The existence of sporadic CJD in humans has led to postulation that
disease could arise spontaneously in any animal, but this theory like
others has not been proved.

In the US one of the H-type BSE case was found to be associated with
the novel mutation E211K within the prion protein gene (Prnp)
suggesting that this strain may have a genetic origin (Ref 26).

There are too few data to enable an assessment of the natural
transmissibility of L- and H-type BSE between cattle, or to sheep or
goats. The present feed control measures, which prevent feeding of
mammalian meat and bone meal to ruminants, would limit the spread of
these forms of BSE to cattle, sheep, and goats should they be
transmissible to these species by the oral route.

Atypical scrapie
----------------
In 1998, scientists in Norway discovered a previously uncharacterized
strain of scrapie that is now called Nor 98 or atypical scrapie (Ref
27). Epidemiological evidence indicates that atypical scrapie may be
a sporadic disease (Ref 28), however additional research is underway
to examine the likelihood of natural transmission and the extent of
tissue distribution. As with atypical BSE, there are few data on the
potential for natural transmission of the disease to sheep and other
species. The disease has been transmitted to sheep however the route
was intracerebral (Ref 29). Studies investigating the possibility of
oral transmission are underway. There is some evidence from
transmission studies utilizing porcinized transgenic mice that pigs
may be susceptible to atypical scrapie and BSE in sheep (Ref 30).
These studies do not involve the natural host or route of
transmission so caution may be taken in drawing conclusions.

Potential for TSEs in other species
-----------------------------------
Studies conducted at the National Institutes of Health Rocky Mountain
Laboratory caution against assuming that animals which do not become
clinically ill are not infected. There is experimental evidence to
indicate that certain species may become carriers (that is, become
infected, shed agent, but do not progress to clinical disease) (Ref
31, Ref 32, Ref 33). Specifically, mice inoculated with 263K hamster
scrapie demonstrated a phase of inactive persistence. That is, after
exposure the mice had a prolonged period (approximately one year),
where there was no evidence of infectivity or PrPsc. This was
followed by a period of an increasing infectivity and agent
adaptation. Many of the mice continued to be devoid of detectable PrPsc.

It will be important to determine if this persistence and adaptation
could occur naturally as it may have significance in feeding programs
which continually expose species other than ruminants to TSE
infectivity. The results of Race and colleagues, warns that an
inactive persistent phase might not produce detectable PrPsc, yet
tissues may harbor infectivity (Ref 32).

Very recent research provides illustrations of the accumulation of
infectivity in tongue and nasal mucosa from terminally diseased field
cases and experimentally challenged cases of BSE even when no
abnormal PrP was detectable (Ref 34). This same phenomenon has also
been reported for peripheral tissues collected from sheep with
atypical scrapie. (Ref 35).

Consumer considerations
-----------------------
In addition to concerns about the BSE health risks, consumers may in
the wake of the BSE crisis have developed ethical views on
appropriate and non-appropriate feeding practices. Even though pigs
and poultry are omnivorous species and animal-based feed is thus part
of their natural diet, some consumers may view cross-feeding of pig
and poultry material with some suspicion, especially if this results
in intraspecies feeding (that is, pig protein crossing back into pig
feed). These concerns should be taken seriously, because they could
lead to a loss of consumer confidence if not addressed adequately.
Timely and clear communication will be needed to discuss with
consumers the rationale for the relaxation of the feed ban both with
regard to BSE risk and with regard to acceptable feeding practices.

Nutritional considerations
--------------------------
The consumption of animal protein is not part of the natural diet of
ruminants. In contrast, pigs and poultry are both omnivorous species,
and thus feeding animal proteins to them does not per se violate
their natural dietary habits. Also, animal proteins have aminoacyl
compositions that closely match the nutritional needs of other
animals -- closer than plant-based proteins -- and are therefore a
valuable feed material (Ref 37).

Economic and ethical considerations
-----------------------------------
Use of animal proteins as feed ingredient is also an economic use of
a valuable product. In 2002, the EC estimated that 16 million tons of
animal by-products would have to be destroyed annually as a result of
the feed ban. In the light of a quickly intensifying competition for
resources between the demands for human food, animal feed, and
biofuels, such a large-scale destruction of biological material will
appear to many as a regrettable loss if not irresponsible waste. The
quantitative dimensions of this loss are hard to estimate, but the
direct economic effects were assessed at Euro 1.5 billion [approx USD
2 billion] due to loss of value of animal by-products, Euro 0.7
billion [approx USD 0.9 billion] due to replacement costs of animal
by-products by other feed ingredients, and another Euro 3 billion
[approx USD 4 billion] due to cost of disposal of animal by-products
(Ref 35). Currently, a part of the meat and bone meal produced in the
EU is used for pet food -- which is still allowed under certain
conditions -- and the remaining part is used as a fuel source for the
generation of renewable energy, as fuel for cement industry, placed
in land fillings, or incinerated.

The growing demand worldwide for animal protein in the human diet is
putting increasing pressure upon the environment and upon the
availability of human food crops, as available land is needed for the
production of animal feed. The removal of large quantities of animal
protein from the animal feed system as a result of feed bans such as
those in place to control TSE's in farm animals only exacerbates this
pressure. It thus raises serious questions about the fair allocation
of resources for human food worldwide, as well as questions of
environmental ethics and sustainability.

Scientific priorities and conclusions
-------------------------------------
Diagnostic tools must be developed with the capacity to verify
compliance with any revised feed ban. These tools must be able to
differentiate between PAPs [processed animal proteins] from different
animal species, and -- in case it is decided to implement a tolerance
level for contamination of feed -- they must be able to determine if
the level of contamination exceeds the defined tolerance levels. More
research is needed to support the assumption that non-ruminant
proteins cannot induce TSE-like diseases in ruminants, even if these
diseases circulated among different non-ruminant species beforehand.

We feel strongly that maintenance of the ban is the only means to
drive the level of risk toward zero.

--
Communicated by:
Terry S Singeltary Sr
<flounder9@verizon.net>

[Overall the verdict of TAFS is that despite the success of the
current feed ban there are key issues to be dealt with before the
feed ban for non-ruminants can be relaxed. The feed industry still
needs to ensure that ruminant materials remain excluded completely
from the entire feed chain. This will require a complete and reliable
traceability system for both ruminant and non-ruminant materials.

Intra-species feeding should be prevented entirely. This requires
that pig and poultry by-products are prevented from mutual
cross-contamination by dedicated separate logistical pathways from
slaughterhouses through rendering and feed production processes. No
animal proteins should be included in ruminant feed. This requires
that the ingredients for and the production of ruminant feed are
completely separate from the ingredients for production of
non-ruminant feed. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Prion disease update 2010 (10) 20101105.4008
Prion disease update 2010 (09) 20101006.3622
Prion disease update 2010 (08) 20100911.3285
Prion disease update 2010 (07) 20100809.2720
Prion disease update 2010 (06) 20100706.2248
Prion disease update 2010 (05) 20100507.1488
Prion disease update 2010 (04) 20100405.1091
Prion disease update 2010 (03) 20100304.0709
Prion disease update 2010 (02) 20100205.0386
Prion disease update 2010 20100107.0076
...................................cp/mj/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at:
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Donations.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to
an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name
name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub-
scribe at <http://www.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.lasso>.
For assistance from a human being, send mail to:
<postmaster@promedmail.org>.
############################################################
############################################################
</body>
