<header id=042076>
Published Date: 2011-12-23 11:31:11 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Schmallenberg virus - Europe (06): (Germany) classification, update
Archive Number: 20111223.3662
</header>
<body id=042076>
SCHMALLENBERG VIRUS - EUROPE (06): (GERMANY) CLASSIFICATION, UPDATE
*******************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 15 Dec 2011 [accessed 23 Dec 2011]
Source: Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI) Federal Research Institute
for Animal Health, Riems, Germany [in German, trans. Mod.AS, edited]
http://www.fli.bund.de/fileadmin/dam_uploads/tierseuchen/111221_Einstufung_Sicherheitsklasse_Schmallenberg-Virus.pdf


Classification in a safety class for the new _Orthobunyavirus_ in
Germany ("Schmallenberg virus")
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Rapporteurs: Dr Martin Beer, Dr Bernd Hoffmann

Introduction
------------
In November 2011, in the framework of its differential diagnostic
activities related to bluetongue virus (BTV), the Friedrich Loeffler
Institute demonstrated a new Orthobunyavirus (see ProMED-mail archive
no. 20111119.3404). The virus was provisionally named "Schmallenberg
Virus" (SBV).

The virus was detected in cattle showing short-term increase in body
temperature and significant milk yield decrease. The disease presented
since August 2011 in numerous farms in North Rhine-Westphalia
(particularly adjacent to the border with Holland). Positive real-time
RT-PCR results for SBV in dairy cows in this region have been obtained
in 11 samples from 5 farms.

The virus was grown in insect cells and later propagated in a hamster
cell line.

In the 1st animal experiment with 3 cows, viral propagation with a
short-lived viremia (days 2-5 post inoculation) was observed. One
animal showed elevated temperature (40.5 deg C/104.9 deg F) for one
day, the other animal moderate diarrhea.

All 3 genome segments (S, M, and L) of the SBV have been completely (S
and L) or partially (M) sequenced. All 3 segments show that the virus
is clearly identified as a representative of the genus
_Orthobunyavirus_. The highest homologies are obtained for the
orthobunyaviruses of the Simbu serogroup. However, since sufficient
sequences for comparison are available in the data bank only for the S
segment, further, more detailed classification could be based only on
the S segment. The S segment of SBV has been found to have the highest
homology (96 percent of the amino acid level) with the Shamonda virus.
The virus is therefore provisionally classified as "a Shamonda-like"
virus.

Simbu serogroup viruses are mostly found in Asia, Australia, and
Africa. According to literature, they are only very rarely associated
with clinical symptoms. An exception is their potential to induce
congenital defects, such as the ones caused by the Akabane virus.
Potential to cause congenital damage in ruminants may be attributed to
other members of the Simbu serogroup. Pathogenicity for humans, though
rare, has been reported (such as the Oropouche virus). Simbu serogroup
viruses are primarily transmitted by insect vectors (midges,
mosquitoes). The infection is not contagious. Viruses of the Simbu
serogroup have not been previously detected in Europe.

Suggested risk classification
-----------------------------
SBV should be considered for all laboratory work in the risk group 2.
For animal experimentation, it should be classified in risk group 3
[see commentary].

Background considerations
-------------------------
1. According to all data assembled thus far, SBV belongs to the Simbu
serogroup, which propagates primarily in ruminants and insect vectors.
In ruminants, the SBV caused subclinical or clinically mild infection.
Congenital damage, however, can not be excluded.

2. The close relationship (of the S segment) to Shamonda virus fits
into this picture and may indicate a similar behavior. The
relationship to Akabane virus and to the human pathogen representative
of this group (Oropouche virus) is significantly lower.

3. Most likely, the transmitter is an insect vector. This is supported
by the timing of occurrence of clinical signs and the genetic
classification.

4. There are no indications on human infections (such as, in laborers,
animal-handling personnel, other persons in the affected region).
However, this assumption is to be further studied (epidemiology,
serology of persons in the region, surveillance).

5. Animal studies deserve to be carried out under high security.
Therefore, analogous to the bluetongue virus where vector-free
conditions were required, level-3 safety requirements are, initially,
prescribed.

--
Communicated by:
Sabine Zentis
Castleview Pedigree English Longhorns
Gut Laach
52385 Nideggen
Germany
http://www.cvlonghorns.de
<cvlonghorns@aol.com>

[The German investigators and the FLI Institute are to be commended
for their swift and efficient handling of the novel Schmallenberg
virus (SBV, provisional name). The paper above includes some data
hitherto unpublished; this refers in particular to the results of the
preliminary infection trial in 3 cows, and the agent's apparent close
genetic relationship to the Shamonda virus (SHAV).

SHAV, an orthobunyavirus of the Simbu group, was initially isolated
from a bovine blood sample in 1965 in Nigeria [ref 1] and later
recovered from _Culicoides imicola_ collected in Nigeria between
November 1967 through December 1970 (ref 2). Its subsequent isolation
took place in Japan, where it was isolated from _Culicoides_ and blood
samples (2002) of sentinel cattle in Kagoshima and Miyazaki
Prefectures, in the southern part of Japan (ref 3). Interestingly,
genetic variation was found to be very low (about 3 percent nt
difference) between Nigerian and Japanese SHAV strains, although the
virus resurged in Japan far from Nigeria over 30 years later. So far,
no information on its pathogenicity and the host spectrum are
available. In view of SBV being the 1st Simbu-group virus detected in
Europe, its potential to cause congenital malformations in the highly
susceptible European ruminants may be regarded to be significant. As
the experience with Akabane virus shows, when endemic the virus will
rarely affect foeti since breeding animals become immune prior to
their 1st pregnancy.

Regarding risk classification, the authors refer, most likely, to the
classification prescribed in EU's legislation, "European Community -
Classification of infectious biological agents by risk group"
(Directive 2000/54EC of 18 Sep 2000, O.J. L 262, 17.10.2000, p.21).
The biological agents are classified according to their risk to
humans, as follows:
1. Group 1 biological agent: one that is unlikely to cause human
disease.
2. Group 2 biological agent: one that can cause human disease and
might be a hazard to workers; it is unlikely to spread to the
community; there is usually effective prophylaxis or treatment
available.
3. Group 3 biological agent: one that can cause severe human disease
and present a serious hazard to workers; it may present a risk of
spreading to the community, but there is usually effective prophylaxis
or treatment available.
4. Group 4 biological agent: one that causes severe human disease and
is a serious hazard to workers; it may present a high risk of
spreading to the community; there is usually no effective prophylaxis
or treatment available.

Additional information on SBV from Germany and Netherlands, and
relevant information from other EU members, is anticipated with
interest.

References
----------
1. Causey OR, Kemp GE, Causey CE, Lee VH: Isolations of Simbu-group
viruses in Ibadan, Nigeria 1964-69, including the new types Sango,
Shamonda, Sabo and Shuni. Ann Trop Med Parasitol. 1972; 66(3):
357-62.
2. Lee VH (1979). Isolation of viruses from field populations of
_Culicoides_ (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) in Nigeria. J Med Entomol.
1979; 16(1): 76-9
3. Yanase T, Maeda K, Kato T, Nyuta S, et al: The resurgence of
Shamonda virus, an African Simbu group virus of the genus
_Orthobunyavirus_, in Japan. Arch Virol. 2005; 150(2): 361-9
(available at
http://www.springerlink.com/content/8H2N504NRUQRW099/fulltext.pdf/).
- Mod.AS

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1zJl]
See Also
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (05): (Netherlands) update 20111221.3653

Schmallenberg virus - Europe (04): (Netherlands) risk profile 20111221.3645
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (03): (Netherlands), cong. mal., ovine,
bovine,
RFI 20111217.3621
Schmallenberg virus - Europe (02): (Germany, Netherlands) update, RFI 20111201.3498
Schmallenberg virus - Europe: (Germany, Netherlands) update, RFI 20111125.3451
.................................................arn/mj/arn/lm
</body>
