<header id=050076>
Published Date: 2011-10-21 06:06:57 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH> Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (07): (CA) raccoon, fox
Archive Number: 20111021.3136
</header>
<body id=050076>
CANINE DISTEMPER, WILDLIFE - USA (07): (CALIFORNIA) RACCOON, FOX
****************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 18 Oct 2011
Source: San Jose Mercury News, Contra Costa Times report [edited]
http://www.mercurynews.com/breaking-news/ci_19143353


More wild foxes and raccoons with distemper signs are being reported
this year [2011] in several Bay Area parks and wildlife centers,
signaling a threat to household pets that aren't vaccinated against
the highly contagious and deadly virus.

Humans don't get distemper, but pets are at risk. Distemper is spread
primarily through the air, but also through direct contact with
infected animals or their bodily fluids.

"There are ebbs and flows with distemper. When populations are high,
the potential for spreading is higher," said Susan Heckley, wildlife
rehabilitation director at the Lindsay Wildlife Museum in Walnut
Creek. "Many wild animals get it. That's a very good reason to
vaccinate your pets." The Lindsay museum reported 6 gray foxes this
summer [2011] with signs of distemper, a slightly higher number than
usual, Heckley said. For each sick animal brought to a shelter or
hospital, there likely are several more in the wild with the disease,
she added.

Chabot Regional Park in Castro Valley also had 6 likely distemper
cases, compared with the 1 or 2 cases in a typical year. Chabot
visitors reported seeing a gray fox having a seizure near a busy
parking lot. The animal died shortly after being taken to a wildlife
hospital.

The Sulphur Creek Wildlife Rehabilitation Center in Hayward has had 3
raccoons and 4 foxes with signs of distemper this year, more than
average but not as many as in peak years, said Rose Britton, the
center's director of animal care.

Tracking trends is difficult because positive diagnoses are not
possible without expensive tests. Some public agencies have
discontinued the tests because of the cost, Britton said.

Still, distemper has telltale signs: goopy eyes, nasal discharges,
emaciation, and in later stages, walking troubles. "They look like
they're drunk," she said.

Wild animals with distemper at wildlife hospitals typically die or are
euthanized. Distemper is usually fatal to puppies and kittens. Adult
cats and dogs have better odds of survival if they get treatment.

Coyotes, bobcats, and skunks can also get distemper.

Because the virus is easily transmitted, sick wild animals pose a risk
even to backyard pets. Unvaccinated dogs and cats can contract
distemper by eating from an outdoor food bowl in their own yard if it
is visited by an infected wild animal at night, or even by sniffing
too near a bush urinated on by an infected animal, wildlife experts
say.

Heckley said she worries some people are skipping vaccinations for
their pets during the tough economic times.

Not all animal centers are reporting increases this year, as distemper
outbreaks can be limited to localized geographic areas.

The Peninsula Humane Society and SPCA center in San Mateo and the
Contra Costa County Animal Services Department shelter in Martinez
reported some cases, but not more than in a typical year.

The Wildlife Center of Silicon Valley lost 4 foxes to distemper, about
the same as in past years. But spikes in raccoon distemper cases in
previous years spurred the shelter's operators last year [2010] to
begin vaccinating wild animals brought there, said Ashley Kinney, the
shelter's wildlife care supervisor.

"We had an increase. Other facilities are having problems. We're
talking about taking prophylactic action to protect the animals we are
caring for," Kinney said.

In San Rafael, the Wildcare Wildlife Rehabilitation Hospital had a
single fox with distemper this year, but it had several raccoon cases
over the previous 3 or 4 years, said Melanie Piazza, the center's
director of wild care. "I feel we are finally getting a breather,"
Piazza said.

Distemper risks are one reason California bars people from trapping
raccoons and other wild animals and then moving them to another area.

"There's a risk you're going to spread the disease," Piazza said.
"That's not humane."

[byline: Denis Cuff]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The San Francisco Bay Area locations mentioned can be seen via the
HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of California at
http://healthmap.org/r/1m86. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ

The presence of this disease in the community should cause owners of
pets to get them vaccinated. This is a serious disease in an
unprotected pet. Further, canine distemper in the fox or the raccoon
can mimic rabies. Caution is recommended.

Canine distemper is a highly contagious, systemic, viral disease of
dogs seen worldwide. Clinically, it is characterized by a diphasic
fever, leukopenia, GI and respiratory catarrh, and frequently
pneumonic and neurologic complications. The disease is seen in Canidae
(dogs, foxes, wolves), Mustelidae (such as, ferret, mink, skunk), most
Procyonidae (such as raccoon, coatimundi), and some Viverridae
(binturong).

Canine distemper virus infection is probably the commonest viral
disease in raccoons. The clinical signs, and gross and histopathologic
lesions in raccoons are similar to distemper in dogs. Neurologic signs
due to distemper virus infection in raccoons are virtually
indistinguishable from rabies induced neurologic disease. Diagnosis is
based upon histopathologic lesions in brain, lung, spleen, and small
intestine. Intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies can be
visualized in many cells including epithelial cells in the respiratory
epithelium, gastric mucosa, and transitional epithelium lining the
renal pelvis and urinary bladder. The best tissues for fluorescent
antibody testing and virus isolation of canine distemper virus are
lung, brain, stomach, small intestine, kidney, and urinary bladder.

Canine distemper in canines, including the fox, exhibits a transient
fever usually occurring 3-6 days after infection, and there may be a
leukopenia (especially lymphopenia) at this time; these signs may go
unnoticed or be accompanied by anorexia. The fever subsides for
several days before a 2nd fever occurs, which lasts less than one
week. This may be accompanied by serous nasal discharge, mucopurulent
ocular discharge, and anorexia. GI and respiratory signs may follow
and are usually complicated by secondary bacterial infections. An
acute encephalomyelitis may occur in association with or following the
systemic disease, or in the absence of systemic manifestations.
Hyperkeratosis of the footpads ("hardpad" disease) and epithelium of
the nasal plane may be seen. Neurologic signs are frequently seen in
those dogs with hyperkeratosis. CNS signs include localized
involuntary twitching of a muscle or group of muscles (myoclonus,
chorea, flexor spasm, hyperkinesia), such as in the leg or facial
muscles; paresis or paralysis, often most noticeable in the hind limbs
as ataxia, followed by tetraparesis and tetraparalysis; and
convulsions characterized by salivation and often chewing movements of
the jaw ("chewing-gum fits"). The seizures become more frequent and
severe, and the dog may fall on its side and paddle its legs;
involuntary urination and defecation (grand mal seizure, epileptiform
convulsion) often occur. A dog may exhibit any or all of these
neurologic signs in addition to others in the course of the disease.
Infection may be mild and inapparent or lead to severe disease
manifest by most of the above signs. The course of the systemic
disease may be as short as 10 days, but the onset of neurologic signs
may be delayed for several weeks or months.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
http://www.addl.purdue.edu/newsletters/1997/fall/raccoon.shtml and
http://www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp?cfile=htm/bc/56700.htm.
- Mod.TG]
See Also
2010
---
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (06): (NY) fox 20101219.4476
Canine distemper, wildlife - Canada: (ON) raccoon 20101016.3748
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (05): (CO) raccoon 20100617.2036
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (04): (AL) raccoon, fox 20100613.1985
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (03): (WA) raccoon 20100421.1288
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (02): (CA): raccoons et al. 20100404.1089
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA: (FL) raccoon, fox 20100218.0566
.................................................sb/tg/mj/sh
</body>
