<header id=022818>
Published Date: 2011-05-19 13:17:38 EDT
Subject: PRO/PL> Al-Wijam disease, date palm - Egypt: 1st report
Archive Number: 20110519.1512
</header>
<body id=022818>
AL-WIJAM DISEASE, DATE PALM - EGYPT: FIRST REPORT
*************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: May 2011
Source: Archives of Phytopathology and Plant Protection [edited]
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/content~db=all~content=a937692589
(abstract)


[Ref: AI Ibrahim et al: Genetic variance between some Egyptian date
palm cultivars using PCR-based markers with emphasis on the prevalence
of Al Wijam disease. Arch. Phytopathology and Plant Protection. 2011;
44: 732-42; DOI: 10.1080/03235400802246929]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Date palm is one of the most important crops in Egypt. At present,
Egypt ranks 2nd in world date production. Date palm plantations have
been suffering from a number of pests and Al-Wijam disease. The
objectives of this study are the identification of genetic variance
between some local varieties of date palm, in line with the
establishment of a molecular diagnostic method to study the aetiology
and the prevalence of Al-Wijam.

For 18 date palm cultivars, DNA fingerprints were obtained and
dendrograms representing genetic relationships established.
Furthermore, 40 date palm trees representing the studied cultivars
were collected from El-Marazik, El-Badrasheen, El-Wahat, and Demiate
Governorates to study the prevalence of Al-Wijam disease using the DNA
hybridisation technique. Symptoms including retardation in terminal
bud growth, whole crown rosetting and yellow longitudinal lines on the
midribs were observed. Non-radioactive Dig-labeled probes specific for
16s rDNA region of phytoplasmas were used to detect the infected
trees.

The nucleic acid hybridisation technique demonstrated in this work
represents an valuable tool for inexpensive diagnosis of date palm
phytoplasma. This study reports the 1st occurrence of natural
infection of phytoplasma-induced "witches broom" [Al-Wijam] disease of
date palm in Egypt.

[We] recommend the early diagnosis of Egyptian date palm cultivars
against phytoplasma causing diseases as well as the development of an
in vitro propagation system as an ideal solution for quick and
certified [disease free] clonal multiplication of superior date palm
genotypes.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Al-Wijam ("not bearing") disease of date palm was reported for the
1st time in 1954 from Saudi Arabia. Symptoms may include yellowing and
reduced size of leaflets, yellow streaks on midribs and bunch stalks,
leaf necrosis, reduction in fruit size, and stunting of palms.
Retardation in terminal bud growth leads to a "rosette" appearance of
the whole crown. Spathes split open before their complete emergence.
Number and size of fruit bunches gradually decline until eventually
the palm stops bearing and dies.

Both a putative 16SrIV (coconut lethal yellowing group) phytoplasma
and a 16SrI (aster yellows group) phytoplasma have previously been
reported from Al-Wijam diseased palms (see links listed below).
_Cicadulina bipunctata_, the maize orange leafhopper, has been
reported as a likely vector of the Al-Wijam phytoplasma(s).

Management of phytoplasma diseases is difficult, especially in long
living hosts. Phytosanitation to reduce inoculum from pre-symptomatic
palms and potential weed hosts is essential, but reliable diagnostic
methods are needed (such as the molecular tests described above).
Insecticide treatments may reduce vector numbers. An ongoing regime of
tetracycline injections is potentially useful to save individual trees
but unsuitable for large scale commercial applications. The use of
certified pathogen free planting material is important, and different
host varieties and/or hybrids may show different levels of disease
resistance or tolerance. Both aspects are addressed by the date palm
breeding and certification programme suggested above for Egypt.

Maps
Egypt:
http://www.worldmapnow.com/images/2009/11/egypt-map2.gif and
http://healthmap.org/r/008F
Egypt governorates:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Governorates_of_Egypt and
http://media.maps.com/magellan/Images/EGYPT-W2.gif

Pictures
Al Wijam symptoms:
http://www.redpalmweevil.com/newlook/MLO1.jpg (midrib),
http://www.redpalmweevil.com/newlook/MLO10.jpg (midrib),
http://www.redpalmweevil.com/newlook/MLO9.jpg (fruit), and
http://www.redpalmweevil.com/newlook/MLO7.jpg (bunch stalk)
_C. bipunctata_, putative Al Wijam vector:
http://www1.dpi.nsw.gov.au/keys/leafhop/species/cbipunctata.jpg
and
http://www.nilgs.affrc.go.jp/db/diseases/contents/IMG/img0640.jpg

Links
Information on Al-Wijam disease:
http://www.bulletinofinsectology.org/pdfarticles/vol60-2007-285-286alhudaib.pdf,
http://www.ndrs.org.uk/article.php?id=015012 (with pictures),
http://www.asplantprotection.org/PDF/AJPP/25-1_2007/116-122.pdf,
http://www.redpalmweevil.com/newlook/mol2.htm,
http://www.acgssr.org/BioTechnology/V5N2July2002/abstract/english/e17.pdf,
and via
http://www.nu.edu.sa/spsite/subdefault.aspx?PageId=557&LangID=2&ID=156
(in Arabic)
16SrI (aster yellows) phytoplasma group, taxonomy and species list:
http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/85620
16SrIV (coconut lethal yellowing) phytoplasma group, taxonomy and
species list:
http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/85624
Phytoplasma resource centre, information, and pictures:
http://www.ba.ars.usda.gov/data/mppl/phytoplasma.html
FAO global date palm network:
http://www.fao.org/newsroom/en/news/2004/48147/index.html. -
Mod.DHA]
See Also
2007
----
Al-Wijam disease, date palm - Saudi Arabia: phytoplasma 20070514.1536
.................................................dha/mj/jw
</body>
