<header id=046358>
Published Date: 2011-12-28 10:17:30 EST
Subject: PRO/ALL> Listeriosis; early reporting on ProMED
Archive Number: 20111228.3689
</header>
<body id=046358>
LISTERIOSIS; EARLY REPORTING ON PROMED
**************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 28 Dec 2011
From: Larry Madoff <lmadoff@promedmail.org>


ProMED never stops watching out for you
---------------------------------------
[If you've already donated, please forgive this intrusion. To the more
than 95 percent of subscribers who have not, please donate now:
http://www.isid.org/donate/netathon2011F.shtml - Mod.LM]

Dear Colleagues:

The end of the summer holiday weekend saw 3 people in Colorado in
hospital complaining of headaches, stiff necks and sore muscles,
fever, and diarrhea. By Wednesday, their illness was diagnosed. By
Friday, ProMED was reporting a listeriosis outbreak, by the following
week ProMED was following up with confirmation of the culprit -- the
"smoking" cantaloupes.

My 1st letter to you when we began this year's ProMED fundraising
recounted how this outbreak swept the United States in September and
October 2011. ProMED had alerted the infectious disease community
within days of the outbreak and provided detailed information about
the threat of Listeria. But, although these fruits were being
distributed throughout North America, a full week passed before the
story appeared in a national newspaper, and 2 full weeks before the
story was picked up and broadcast by major radio, television, and
newspapers. How many unknowing consumers bought and consumed melons
that put themselves and their families at risk because of this delay?

ProMED's ability to get you news when you want it -- now -- is what
makes ProMED so important to your life and work. And that is why it is
so important that you contribute to keeping ProMED healthy, now!

http://www.isid.org/donate/netathon2011F.shtml

No other source provides the accurate, relevant, and timely emerging
infectious disease reporting that ProMED provides multiple times each
day. Covering the entire One Health spectrum of human, animal, and
crop plant diseases, ProMED brings you news and unique expert
interpretation and context that informs you about the disease and
helps you understand how it might affect you, your family, your
patients, your business, and your plans. No other source keeps you so
well informed on topics you need and want to know about. No other
source covers the topic of infectious diseases so broadly, deeply, and
internationally. No other source provides it free of charge.

Except, of course, it is not free. We provide access to it for free,
but the level and quality of service ProMED provides you is expensive.
ProMED has been widely recognized for the transparency and scope of
its reporting, the depth of its commentary. Now is the time for you to
recognize the important role you play as a reader and supporter.
Please help keep ProMED unfettered, uncensored, and free -- please
donate right now.

http://www.isid.org/donate/netathon2011F.shtml

Your support makes it possible for ProMED to provide readers with the
context needed to understand events and analyze outcomes. Eventually
the melons -- and the disease -- spread to 28 states; 139 people were
sickened and 29 people died in this listeriosis outbreak. Once ProMED
reports a story, it doesn't disappear. With 13 follow-up postings,
ProMED pursued the outbreak for another 8 weeks providing up-to-date
news, cogent commentary, and relevant links to medical and scientific
information and reporting from other sources. Your generosity makes
ProMED the trusted, vital asset it is. Thank you.

Sincerely,
--
Larry Madoff, MD
Editor, ProMED-Mail
<lmadoff@promedmail.org>

[P.S. In the U.S. your gift may be tax-deductible. In acknowledgement
of the importance of your gift to ProMED, please accept a small gift
from ProMED. Indicate your preference when you make your online
contribution.

http://www.isid.org/donate/netathon2011F.shtml]

.................................................lm/ejp/jw
</body>
