<header id=044037>
Published Date: 2011-11-18 08:37:53 EST
Subject: PRO/AH> Avian influenza (70): transmissibility in ferrets
Archive Number: 20111118.3399
</header>
<body id=044037>
AVIAN INFLUENZA (70): TRANSMISSIBILITY IN FERRETS
*************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 17 Nov 2011
Source: CIDRAP (Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy) News
[edited]
http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/cidrap/content/influenza/avianflu/news/nov1711board.html


H5N1 transmission experiment stirs concern
------------------------------------------
A national biosecurity board that monitors "dual use" research is
apparently worried about an as-yet-[un]published study in which a
mutant form of H5N1 avian influenza virus was found to be easily
transmissible in ferrets, which are considered good models for flu in
humans. A National Public Radio (NPR) report today [17 Nov 2011] said
the National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity (NSABB) is
scrutinizing the research by Dr Ron Fouchier of Erasmus University
Medical Center in the Netherlands [see ProMED-mail Avian influenza
(68): H5N1 transmissibility to ferrets, archive no. 20111108.3323].
The board provides guidance on biological research that has a
legitimate purpose but could be misused to endanger public health.

Dr Paul S Keim, acting chair of the NSABB, said today [17 Nov 2011]
that the board is conducting a review of H5N1 virus transmission in
mammals, but because of the board's confidentiality rules, he could
not give any details. Keim is director of pathogen genomics in the
Translational Genomics Research Institute at Northern Arizona
University. Referring to the Office of Biotechnology Activities [OBA]
in the National Institutes of Health's Office of Science Policy, Keim
told CIDRAP News, "We have now been directed by OBA staff that we can
acknowledge that a review process on the H5N1 transmissibility in
mammals is under way. We are not allowed to provide additional
details."

The H5N1 virus causes human illness relatively rarely, but it is often
deadly when it does, with a case-fatality rate of about 60 percent
among cases confirmed by the World Health Organization. Though the
virus has circulated in poultry in many countries since 2003, it has
not gained the ability to spread easily in humans. Scientists worry
that if it did gain that ability, it could spark a fearsome pandemic.
With the goal of identifying genetic changes that could lead to
greater person-to-person transmissibility, a number of researchers
have introduced mutations in the virus and studied how the mutant
strains behaved in animals.

Fouchier gave a general description of his experiments at a European
meeting in September [2011], according to a news story published in
Scientific American after the meeting. He and his team introduced
various mutations into the virus and watched their effects on its
ability to attach to human respiratory tract cells. They found that
with as few as 5 single mutations, the virus could bind to nasal and
tracheal cells, according to the story. But when tested in ferrets,
this mutant virus still didn't spread very easily through close
contact. Fouchier and his team then undertook to let the virus evolve
naturally -- a project that he described as "really, really stupid,"
according to the story. They inoculated one ferret with the mutant
virus, and after it got sick, they exposed a 2nd ferret to infectious
material from the 1st one. After they repeated this process 10 times,
"H5N1 became as easily transmissible as seasonal flu," the story said.
Fouchier said he concluded from this that H5N1 viruses "can become
airborne" and do not need to reassort with other mammalian flu viruses
to do so. The report quoted another expert, Albert Osterhaus, also of
Erasmus University, as saying the individual mutations that Fouchier
introduced have already occurred naturally in animals, but not
together.

Further details about Fouchier's study have been hard to come by. In
response to a CIDRAP News query last week, Fouchier said he couldn't
comment on the study until it is published. Other flu experts,
including those at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), also declined to discuss the study or didn't reply to queries
last week. The NPR report said the Fouchier study is the subject of a
"fierce debate" among disease experts and is being reviewed by the
NSABB. The experiment was criticized by some experts quoted in the NPR
report. "It's just a bad idea for scientists to turn a lethal virus
into a lethal and highly contagious virus, and it's a 2nd bad idea to
publish how they did it so others can copy it," said Thomas V
Inglesby, MD, director of the Center for Biosecurity at the University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center, who is not a member of the NSABB. While
biology has a culture of openness and relies on the full sharing of
findings, occasional exceptions to this policy are warranted, and
Fouchier's study calls for an exception, he told NPR.

It was not immediately clear just how the NSABB might influence
whether and in what form Fouchier's findings would be published. The
board makes recommendations on policies governing publication, public
communication, and dissemination of dual use research methods and
results, according to information on the OBA website. It is up to the
federal government to convene relevant agencies to determine how to
respond to the recommendations.

One previous case in which the NSABB influenced a research publication
pertained to reports on the reconstruction of the 1918 pandemic flu
virus using material from preserved tissue samples, according to Keim.
"In this case NSABB recommended that the papers be modified to better
represent the biosafety aspects of the research and also to explain
the positive benefits of the work to public health," he told CIDRAP
News. "There were no restrictions recommended by NSABB on the actual
data or limitations to the results distribution."

Some other recent studies have tested the ability of mutant or
reassortant strains of H5N1 to replicate and spread in animals, but
the findings were less dramatic than Fouchier's. For example, the
December [2011] issue of the Journal of Virology includes a study in
which researchers at St Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis
inserted the hemagglutinin gene from a 1997 Hong Kong strain of H5N1
virus into a pandemic 2009 H1N1 virus. When this hybrid was grown
serially in human lung epithelial cells, it became more pathogenic in
mice, "suggesting that these viruses may easily adapt to humans and
become more virulent," the report says. The authors concluded that
natural reassortment between circulating 2009 H1N1 and H5N1 viruses
could lead to viruses with increased pathogenicity in mammals. Dr Lynn
Enquist, the Journal of Virology's editor-in-chief and a member of the
NSABB, told NPR that the journal's staff carefully considered whether
to publish the paper. He observed that the type of reassortant the
scientists created could occur in nature.

Another recent study, by researchers from the CDC and Scripps Research
Institute, suggested that it would take a series of complex changes
for H5N1 viruses to achieve airborne transmissibility in ferrets. They
determined that a particular strain of H5N1, when modified with
certain mutations from previous pandemic viruses, could spread in
ferrets by direct contact but not by airborne respiratory droplets,
according to their report in Virology. Only when they inserted a
neuraminidase gene from a human flu virus did this virus achieve a
modest ability to spread via respiratory droplets. "The complex
genetic changes required by a clade 2.2 H5N1 virus to reach a low
level of transmissibility in ferrets would indicate that considerable
functional evolution is still required for acquisition of
transmissibility in humans," the report concludes.

[Byline: Robert Roos]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

[Readers should make up their own mind about the issues discussed in
the CIDRAP News report above. In my opinion it would be both futile
and unwise to attempt to control the deign of experiments and the
publication of data in this field of research.

Furthermore my assessment of the results of this research so far
remains unchanged. Namely, that the current data are consistent with
an interpretation that although the rapid evolution of a novel H5N1
pandemic virus cannot be excluded, it is likely to be a rare event.
The research priority should remain the reduction of exposure of
humans to the avian virus in domestic poultry. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Avian influenza (68): H5N1 transmissibility to ferrets 20111108.3323
2006
----
Avian influenza, human (178): receptor mutations 20061116.3279
Avian influenza virus (03): virus receptor distribution 20060322.0893
.................................................cp/mj/mpp
</body>
