<header id=019938>
Published Date: 2011-09-14 17:19:42 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Human, livestock fatalities - Burkina Faso: (SH), anthrax susp. RFI
Archive Number: 20110914.2806
</header>
<body id=019938>
HUMAN, LIVESTOCK FATALITIES - BURKINA FASO: (SAHEL), ANTHRAX
SUSPECTED, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION
***********************************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 9 Sep 2011
Source: lefaso.net [in French, trans., edited]
http://lefaso.net/spip.php?article43887


During a government press briefing the Minister of Animal Resources,
Jeremy Ouedraogo, reported on his visit to the Sahel where in a
village of Essakane [Oudalan province] 3 children were poisoned, 2 of
whom later died. Residents also noted the death of a number of
animals, including cattle, sheep, and goats. "The veterinary services
immediately moved to destroy and bury the carcasses," stated Jeremy
Ouedraogo. The population has been informed of the precautions against
the phenomenon. Investigations were initiated to identify the cause of
the mortality. Cases of 'charbon' (anthrax) were identified, but this
remains to be confirmed by further [laboratory] analysis.

Some people have complained about the Essakane gold mine, located
about 500 m [0.3 mi] from the village, referring to products used in
the treatment of gold. "We have examined the bio safety of the mine.
It is fully secured by a dam and other facilities. However, "the
sealing of certain parts should be checked," noted the Minister of
Animal Resources.

The seasonal movement of livestock across borders and inter-farmer
conflicts were also part of the discussions with the press. The
minister said in order to reduce the movement of livestock it would be
necessary to resolve the land issues, to delineate grazing areas, and
to increase the water points.

Land issues are also the main cause of conflicts between farmers and
herders. Since the beginning of 2011, nearly 400 cases of conflict
have been recorded. Jeremy Ouedraogo stressed the urgency of resolving
the land issue as farming contributes enormously to the economic
development, especially in rural areas. "It is necessary to demarcate
grazing areas in communal development plans, with the participation of
all stakeholders to avoid litigation [or worse]."

[Byline: Bachirou Nana]

--
Communicated by:
Ronan Kelly
for FluTrackers.com
<ronankelly@comcast.net>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 9 Sep 2011
Source: burkina24.com [in French, trans., edited]
http://burkina24.com/news/2011/09/09/mort-suspectes-a-essakane-les-ministres-rassurent/


On the occasion of the weekly government press briefing held Thu 8 Sep
2011, the ministers of health, Prof Adama Traor, and Animal Resources,
Jeremy Ouedraogo, commented on the cases of suspicious deaths recently
observed in Essakane.

Indeed, animals have died in this village near the gold mine of the
same name. 2 children who consumed the meat of these animals are also
dead. This raises questions but 'charbon' [anthrax] is suspected
laboratory confirmation is awaited. Detailed investigations are
underway.

In the meantime, it would be prudent to observe strict hygiene rules
to put people out of danger.

[Byline: Abdoul Hadi Diabate]

--
Communicated by:
Ronan Kelly
for FluTrackers.com
<ronankelly@comcast.net>

******
[3]
Date: Thu 8 Sep 2011
Source: lefaso.net [in French, trans., edited]
http://www.lefaso.net/spip.php?article43861


The Minister of Animal Resources, Dr Jeremy Ouedraogo, conducted a
field trip in the Sahel region to assess the extent of mortality of
animals, scavengers, and 2 children in Essakane, on 6 Sep 2011.

The minister's visit to Karafala/Essakane, allowed him to verify the
effectiveness of protective measures taken by the technical services,
following the report of the deaths of animals including one bovine, 5
goats, and 2 sheep. Added to this are more than 30 scavengers
[vultures] whose remains were found at the site of the slaughterhouse
in Essakane. And all this in 24 hours. Previously, 2 children died
after 6 days of illness.

The minister said this is a public health issue because the ministry
not only ensures the promotion of livestock, but is also responsible
for meat inspection and safety. Accompanied by representatives of
various technical services, he went evaluate the situation in
Essakane. "We are in the phase of investigation to know exactly what
these animals and birds died of. The visit proved to be extremely
important to us. On the one hand, it is a question of determining with
those responsible for the mine, the provisions taken on their level,
as regards biosecurity. And on the other hand, to identify with
farmers and the public the conditions under which these animals were
killed [sic] and most importantly, the measures that people need to
take to avoid being infected by eating the meat, " he said.

Investigations are underway to determine precisely the causes of such
mortality. Moreover, he stated that the measures taken to avoid
contamination are extremely effective. Among these measures is a pit
where the animals were buried, and all the arrangements such that the
animals do not cross the barriers limiting access to the mine. In
addition, the Minister assured that scavengers did not die by eating
excrement or the [carcass] remains at the slaughterhouse, as the meat
inspection was in line with current standards. According to the
Minister of Animal Resources, the local authorities have not
registered a complaint, or inconvenience whatsoever on the part of
consumers.

It is unclear what poisoned the birds. "We will continue
investigations to determine the real reasons. We welcome the readiness
of the 1st authorities and technical services that have applied
protection measures to the letter: do the cleaning and inspection
necessary and especially proceed with the cremation and burial of all
droppings and dead birds. We came to see the efficiency and
effectiveness of these measures on the ground. Once the causes are
identified, we will take appropriate action, either with the gold mine
or with the municipal authorities for the protection of citizens," he
said.

This strategy, from his point of view, will help protect animals and
to avoid the worst if there has been a possible contamination of these
places. Regarding the consumption of meat, he indicated he has
assurances that that inspection was made and no deficiencies were
found. Dr Ouedraogo advises the people not to touch the bodies of
vultures found dead at the slaughterhouse and its surroundings so that
they can proceed to bury them. The Minister also visited the premises
of a farmer-leader at Douman Deber, in the commune of Gorom-Gorom
[Oudalan province] and the small dairy of sector No 1 in Dori. He then
met with farmers to discuss their concerns. The results of the
investigation, expected shortly.

In the opinion of the Deputy Director of Health, Safety and
Sustainable Development, Julien Baudrand, the Essakane gold mine,
given all the security arrangements to which it is subject, should not
have negative impact on the population. According to him, though, if
animals are able to cross the grid and enter the site, the owners are
informed and compensated, and those animals are then slaughtered and
buried within the site. The Deputy Director explained that the
infrastructure of the site is made to withstand flood waters, even
during heavy rainfall, and the gold mine has an environmental
monitoring program.

However, a resident of the village gave his version, sickened by the
deaths of 2 children, whose parents he knows. When it rains, he said,
"water from the dam floods down onto the grass grazed by our animals
and then usually we eat the meat from dead animals. It was only when 2
children died and with veterinary advice that we stopped eating them,"
he said.

[Byline: Aimee Florentine Kabore]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Where one has gold mining there is always a significant risk of
mercury poisoning. Chemical waste waters are notorious for escaping
adequate control. So until this working diagnosis is confirmed this
can only be a 'suspect' anthrax outbreak.

But finding some 30 dead vultures near the town slaughterhouse is
definitely a red flag for a cause other than "anthrax". Vultures like
all birds, other than rheas and ostriches, are not susceptible to
infection by _Bacillus anthracis_. Secondly, such a large number dying
suddenly does indicate some common toxic exposure. - Mod.MHJ]

[There is a process in extraction of gold called cyanide extraction.
It is process that uses cyanide to separate tiny or fine bits of gold
from the rock. It is also used in extracting tiny or fine particles of
silver from rock. It is not the simple application of sodium cyanide
to the rock, but rather a whole process of extraction. In the past,
this has resulted in deaths when many tons of the cyanide products
were released when a dam for the waste product broke.

Many vulture species, as well as other flesh eating birds have been
shown to be susceptible to cyanide, from carcasses, and from
cyanogenic plants.

If there is a problem with the gold mine or its waste treatment, this
may be the cause of the demise of all involved. - Mod.TG]

[Maps of Burkina Faso can be seen at
http://www.maplibrary.org/stacks/Africa/Burkina%20Faso/index.php and
http://healthmap.org/r/1eIV. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

.................................................mpp/mhj/mj/mhj/mpp/mj/tg/mpp
</body>
