<header id=029065>
Published Date: 2011-09-27 07:46:12 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic ulcerative synd., fish - Australia (02): (QL) human susp.
Archive Number: 20110927.2926
</header>
<body id=029065>
EPIZOOTIC ULCERATIVE SYNDROME, FISH - AUSTRALIA (02): (QUEENSLAND)
HUMAN CASES SUSPECTED
****************************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Sun 25 Sep 2011
Source: The Sunday Mail (QL) [edited]
http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/toxic-harbour-fish-fears/story-e6freoof-1226145338037


The commercial fishermen who blew the whistle on what they call an
environmental disaster in Gladstone Harbour say dead fish will soon
wash up on its shores. They insist sick, blind, and ulcerated fish
were being pulled out of the harbour for months ahead of last week's
[week of 19 Sep 2011] official ban by the State Government.

Operators say they were working alongside Queensland Fisheries
officers, who were monitoring possible turtle kills, when they dragged
sick and slime-covered fish from waters around Gladstone Harbour. The
fishermen say the Government acted only after it was presented with an
ultimatum a fortnight ago that they would go public with their
concerns. The ban was slapped on 24 hours later.

A dozen fishermen have reported being ill from handling the fish,
along with the pregnant wife of a deckhand and their 2 young children
exposed when they met their dad when his boat was pulled ashore.

At least 2 of the fishermen have spent time in hospital, including a
Tannum Sands operator who spent 5 days on a drip. He said fishermen
had no option but to act, fearing children would be exposed to the
toxins during the school holidays. "I couldn't walk," [the man] said.
"I spent 5 nights in the Mater Hospital in Gladstone. It cost AUD 5800
[about USD 5653]. My foot was flaming red. I had a temperature of 39
deg C [102.2 deg F]."

On Friday [23 Sep 2011], Fisheries Queensland released findings that
the dead fish had been attacked by a mystery parasitic fluke that was
sending them blind. They were also suffering from red spot, a disease
usually found in Queensland waters after the 1st heavy rains of summer
or during lean winter times.

But the cause of the outbreak was yet to be confirmed. Fisheries
Queensland's Dr John Robertson said red spot disease could develop
into burn-like marks, or ulcers with red centres. He said more
research was needed into the parasite, which affected the eye of the
fish. "We now know that this parasite is what has been causing the
cloudy eyes in some barramundi in the area," he said.

Additional testing is being conducted on new samples of other fish
species, prawns, and mud crabs but results are not expected for
several weeks. Until then, the fishing ban remains.

A 4th-generation fisherman believed dredging was to blame. He said the
fish were fine in clear reef water but became stressed as they
approached Gladstone Harbour. Once in the port, they "roll" - die and
go belly-up. "We are devastated at the situation here in Gladstone but
we know that we have done all the right things to advise all
government authorities to keep people safe," he said.

Queensland Seafood Industry Association president Michael Gardner said
the dead turtles, dugongs, and fish found in the Gladstone area were
"an environmental disaster." He said the sick and dead animals
coincided with dredging by Gladstone Port Corporation working on the
massive LNG plant and pipeline being built in the harbour.

But the port corporation says they are not to blame. Chief executive
officer Leo Zussino said dredging was tightly controlled. He said the
sick seafood had been fished out of the harbour before dredging began.
The corporation says the harbour has been dredged in the past without
any impact on fish. Instead, it blames fresh water from the floods
earlier this year [2011] hurting marine life.

Mr Zussino said the dredging had not stirred up contaminants because
testing showed there were none on the harbour floor. "A lot of people
say there's been contamination in Gladstone Harbour for a century.
That's simply not true," he said.

[Byline: Daniel Knowles]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Red spot disease [Epizotic Ulcerative Syndrome is quite a serious
ulcerative disease of many (more than 100) species of freshwater and
estuarine fish. The causative agent of red spot disease is a fungus,
_Aphanomyces invadans_. The scenario described appears to be more
complex than just a red spot disease outbreak in fish. Red spot
disease outbreaks are associated with stress. There is also mention of
environmental disruption and die-offs of other unrelated species, i.e.
dugongs (mammals) and turtles (reptilians) (see
http://news.ninemsn.com.au/national/8352059/turtles-and-dugongs-die-in-droves-derm).
The whole ecosystem health appears to be compromised. Human health
hazards from red spot disease outbreaks are related to secondary
bacterial infections.

Regarding the undiagnosed parasite, if they are trematodes (flukes),
they might be zoonotic (humans and animals acquire these fish-borne
zoonotic trematodes infection through consumption of raw, inadequately
cooked fished that harbor infective etacercariae stages), but the
disease they cause does not match the report description, besides
apparently the fishermen became sick from handling the fish, not
eating them. - Mod.PMB]
See Also
Epizootic ulcerative synd., fish - Australia: (QL) 20110925.2908
Epizootic ulcerative synd., fish - Canada: corr. 20110330.0983
Epizootic ulcerative synd., fish - Canada 20110326.0952
.................................................pmb/mj/pmb/lm
</body>
