<header id=027159>
Published Date: 2009-08-27 19:50:00 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (35): NZ surveillance
Archive Number: 20090827.3022
</header>
<body id=027159>
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC (H1N1) 2009 (35): NEW ZEALAND SURVEILLANCE
*************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Thu 27 Aug 2009
Source: Eurosurveillance 2009; 14(34) [edited]
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19319>


Pandemic influenza A(H1N1) in New Zealand, Apr-Aug 2009
-------------------------------------------------------
By: M G Baker, N Wilson, Q S Huang, S Paine, L Lopez, D Bandaranayake, et
al. [affiliatioins available at URL above]

Following the detection of imported cases of pandemic influenza A(H1N1)v
[pandemic influenza (H1N1) 2009 virus] on 25 Apr 2009, New Zealand
implemented containment measures that appeared to slow establishment of the
pandemic during May 2009. The pandemic accelerated markedly in June 2009,
reaching a peak within 4 to 6 weeks, and has been declining since mid-July
2009. By 23 Aug 2009, there had been 3179 recorded cases (97.8 per cent
reported as confirmed), including 972 hospitalisations, 114 intensive care
admissions, and 16 deaths. Influenza-like illness (ILI) surveillance in
general practice suggests that 7.5 per cent (95 per cent CI: 3.4-11.2) of
the population of New Zealand had symptomatic infection, giving a case
fatality ratio of 0.005 per cent. Hospitalisations were markedly higher for
Maori (age standardised relative risk (RR)=3.0, 95 per cent CI: 2.9-3.2)
and Pacific peoples (RR=6.7, 95 per cent CI: 6.2-7.1) compared with
Europeans and others. The apparent decline of the pandemic (shown by all
surveillance systems) cannot be fully explained. New Zealand remains in the
middle of its traditional influenza season; the influenza A(H1N1)v virus
appears relatively infectious, and we estimate that only about 11 per cent
of the population have been infected by this novel agent.

Introduction
------------
There has been considerable international interest in how the influenza
A(H1N1)v pandemic might evolve during the southern hemisphere winter [1].
Initial reports from Australia showed an epidemic increase in ILI reported
by general practice (GP) sentinel surveillance from late May 2009 and
peaking 4 to 6 weeks later in June 2009 [2]. Another southern hemisphere
country, Peru, also observed an epidemic that accelerated rapidly in June
2009, followed by an apparent decline [3]. Here we report the epidemiology
of this pandemic in New Zealand based on the experience of the 1st 4
months, from late April 2009 to late August 2009.

Methods
-------
New Zealand has multiple systems for surveillance of influenza, as listed
below. Here we report on key surveillance findings, particularly from the
1st 7 of these systems.

- notifiable disease surveillance: non-seasonal influenza A(H1N1) was made
a notifiable disease on 30 Apr 2008. Data are entered into a national
web-based database (EpiSurv) operated by the Institute of Environmental
Science and Research (ESR) and are available for immediate analysis. This
system also records hospitalised and fatal cases.
- GP surveillance: data on ILI consultations with primary care medical
practitioners are collected through 2 systems: the Sentinel GP Surveillance
System (95 general practices covering about 10 per cent of the New Zealand
population) and HealthStat (84 computerised general practices with an
additional 300 added in 2009, now covering about 40 per cent of the New
Zealand population). These systems provide weekly reports of ILI activity.
- laboratory-based surveillance: nasopharyngeal swabs are collected by
practitioners contributing to the Sentinel GP Surveillance System from a
known number of patients seen with ILI every week. These influenza isolates
are typed and tested for sensitivity to oseltamivir [4]. Specimens are also
collected for diagnostic reasons from outpatients and hospitalised
inpatients and as part of public health follow-up and investigation.
- healthline: reports on telephone calls regarding ILI made by the public
to a national free-calling health information service are collated every
week. This surveillance records daily counts of calls triaged for ILI,
based on a wide set of key terms and clinical syndromes.
- hospital intensive care unit (ICU) utilisation: this additional
surveillance was established as part of the situation reporting system used
by the Ministry of Health to support its ongoing pandemic management
activities. It collects daily reports from all District Health Boards on a
number of measures of healthcare utilisation including ICU influenza
admissions, total occupancy, and ventilator capacity.
- population survey (Flutracker): a cross-sectional survey was designed by
the Ministry of Health and conducted by a market research company to
measure the prevalence of ILI in the population and to assess the
feasibility of using this form of surveillance on an ongoing basis. This
survey used telephone interviewing. The pilot survey in June 2009 used a
nationally representative sample of 629 people in 219 households. This full
surveillance system was not continued because it was not considered
necessary for the scale of the pandemic and was relatively expensive.
- mortality: data from death certificates and coroner's reports are
provisionally collated within days by the Ministry of Health (but final
analysis and reporting of national data take about 2 years).
- hospital morbidity: all publicly funded hospitals in New Zealand report
hospitalisation data to the Ministry of Health with collated data available
within 3 months (consequently, these data were not available for this
analysis, so notification data were used here to described hospitalisations).
- other influenza surveillance systems: there are also regional systems for
syndromic surveillance (based on one hospital emergency department in the
capital city) and absenteeism surveillance (recording workplace and school
absenteeism in one region of New Zealand). Rates were calculated using 2008
mid-year population estimates except for ethnicity, which used 2006 census
data as the denominator. When calculating rates for ethnic groups, we used
prioritised ethnicity (where individuals record multiple ethnicities, MCori
ethnicity takes precedence, followed by Pacific peoples, then Asian, with
the remaining people included as European and other). Rates were
age-standardised using the age distribution of the 2006 census.

Results
-------
Incidence: Up to 23 Aug 2009, there had been 3179 notified cases of
influenza A(H1N1)v in New Zealand, a rate of 74.5/100 000. Most cases were
reported as confirmed (97.8 per cent), with the rest (2.2 per cent)
classified as probable. Of the total cases, 972 (30.6 per cent) were
reported to have been hospitalised, 114 admitted to an ICU, and 16 to have
died of pandemic influenza as the primary cause of death. Other possible
pandemic-associated deaths are still being investigated by the coroner's
office [5].

Over the 11 week period that the pandemic strain has been circulating in
New Zealand (from week 24, starting 8 Jun 2009, to week 34, ending Sun 23
Aug 2009), the Sentinel GP Surveillance System detected a cumulative
consultation rate of 1906.2 ILI cases/100 000 population (that is, 1.9 per
cent). During that same period, 382 influenza A(H1N1)v viruses were
obtained from these sentinel practices, which were 19.0 per cent of the
swabs collected from patients with ILI. These data suggest a cumulative
general practice consultation rate for influenza A(H1N1)v of 408.9/100 000,
equivalent to a cumulative total of 17 672 patients across New Zealand.

Time course: epidemic curves for notifications, hospitalisations, ICU
admissions and ILI cases (Sentinel GP Surveillance System, HealthStat, and
Healthline calls) are shown in the form of figures in the original text.
The 1st known cases in New Zealand were detected on 25 Apr 2009 following
arrival of a flight containing a school group who had travelled to Mexico.
Containment efforts (case isolation, quarantine of contacts, and treatment
with oseltamivir) appeared to have successfully prevented transmission from
that group. No further cases of laboratory-confirmed disease were detected
for about 4 weeks from 1 May 2009 until 31 May 2009.

Following the end of May 2009, a marked increase in influenza was detected
by all surveillance systems starting in the 1st or 2nd week of June 2009
(depending on the system). All surveillance systems showed that the
epidemic reached a peak within 4 to 6 weeks (during the weeks starting Mon
27 Jun 2009 to 12 Jul 2009).

Notifiable diseases: the 1st cases were notified in the week starting 27
Apr 2009 (student group from Mexico). There was a rapid rise in notified
cases of influenza A(H1N1)v in week 23 (starting 1 Jun 2009), with a peak 6
weeks later in week 28 (starting 6 Jul 2009).

Hospitalisations (subset of notifications): the hospitalisation numbers
showed the same pattern as the notifications. The 1st hospitalisations were
in week 23 (starting 1 Jun 2009), with a peak 6 weeks later in week 28
(starting 6 Jul 2009).

Hospital intensive care admissions: new admissions to ICU followed a
similar pattern to hospitalisations, with the 1st admission in week 24 and
a peak in week 28. About 12 per cent of hospitalised cases were admitted to
ICU.

Sentinel GP surveillance: this system showed a rapid rise in ILI cases
evident in week 24 (starting 8 Jun 2009), with a peak 6 weeks later in week
29 (starting 13 Jul 2009).

HealthStat GP surveillance: this system showed a rapid rise in ILI cases
evident in week 24 (starting 8 Jun 2009), with a peak 4 weeks later in week
27 (starting 29 Jun 2009).

Healthline calls: there was a rapid rise in ILI calls from the public
evident from late in week 23 (starting 1 Jun 2009). The calls peaked 2
weeks later in week 25 (starting 15 Jun 2009).

Laboratory surveillance: influenza A(H1N1)v was 1st detected by the
Sentinel GP Surveillance System in week 24 (starting 8 Jun 2009). It became
the dominant circulating strain after 4 weeks (week 27 starting 29 Jun 2009).

Population survey (Flutracker): for the week of 22-28 Jun 2009 (week 26),
ILI was reported by 2.0 per cent (95 per cent CI: 0.9-3.0) in a sample of
619 people. This was an ILI prevalence of 2000/100 000 population (95 per
cent CI: 900-3000). During that week, the Sentinel GP Surveillance System
reported a consultation rate of 137.7/100 000 (peaking 2 and 3 weeks later
at a rate of 272.0 and 284.0/100 000). Also during that week, the expanded
HealthStat GPs (n=384 GPs) reported a consultation rate of 80.7/100 000
(peaking one and 2 weeks later with a consultation rate of 112.0 and
119.6/100 000). Taking the average of these 2 rates for week 26 (109.2/100
000) implies that only one in 18.3 people with ILI consulted a GP and were
also recorded by the ILI surveillance system (95 percent CI: 8.2-27.5).

Region: the intensity of the epidemic varied widely across New Zealand,
with some regions experiencing rates markedly higher than others. Across
the 21 district health board regions, the cumulative hospitalisation rate
ranged from 0.0/100 000 in Wairarapa to 52.9/100 000 in Hutt Health
District (Wellington). The national average was 22.8/100 000.

Person characteristics: notification data were analysed according to the
age, sex, and ethnicity of notified and hospitalised cases [data also
presented graphically]. Rates of notified disease were highest in infants
[under one year of age] (218.5/100 000) and those aged 15-29 years
(124.6/100 000), with the lowest rates in those over the age of 70 years
(15.3/100 000). Hospitalisations showed a similar pattern, with markedly
higher rates in those under one year of age (149.8/100 000), but with rates
falling to a relatively low level for all age groups over the age of 5
years. Hospitalisation rates for females (24.3/100 000) were slightly
higher than for males (20.9/100 000).

Rates of notified disease were highest in MCori (age standardised relative
risk (RR)=2.0, 95 per cent CI: 1.9-2.1) and Pacific peoples (RR=4.0, 95 per
cent CI: 3.8-4.3), compared with Europeans and others. These inequalities
were even more marked for hospitalisations (MCori RR=3.0, 95 per cent CI:
2.9-3.2, Pacific peoples RR=6.7, 95 per cent CI: 6.2-7.1).

Discussion
----------
The virus: the pandemic influenza A(H1N1)v virus became the predominant
circulating influenza virus in primary care settings in New Zealand within
4 weeks of its appearance [6]. It has been genetically very stable, based
on testing conducted in New Zealand, and remains sensitive to oseltamivir
[7]. The virology of this influenza epidemic was unique in that it was
characterised by the co-circulation of 3 influenza A strains. As of 23 Aug
2009, there has been virtually no influenza B activity.

The pandemic: the pandemic in New Zealand has been characterised by
relatively high transmissibility but low case fatality ratio (CFR). The
reproduction number estimated for the early stages of the epidemic was 1.96
(95 per cent CI: 1.80-2.15) [8]. The data from the Sentinel GP Surveillance
System imply that about 17 672 patients infected with the pandemic strain
have consulted a GP during the initial 11 weeks of the pandemic period.
Given that the data from the cross-sectional survey (Flutracker) for week
26 imply that only one in 18.3 of the population with ILI are reported to
this sentinel system, these data suggest that a cumulative total of 323 400
New Zealanders (7.5 per cent, 95 per cent CI: 3.4-11.2) have had
symptomatic infection with the pandemic strain during this period.
Experimental studies suggest about one 3rd of seasonal influenza infections
are asymptomatic [9], so these findings would be consistent with about 11
per cent of the population having been infected with the pandemic strain.
This result is broadly consistent with one other New Zealand estimate:
Using capture-recapture methods and combining data from 4 sources, it was
estimated that 3.7 per cent of the population of 2 Auckland regions
(population 0.93 million) were symptomatically infected in a single month
(July 2009) [10].

Case fatality ratio: calculating the CFR is highly dependent on estimates
of the total number of people with symptomatic illness [11]. There have
been 16 deaths with the pandemic influenza strain recorded as the principal
cause (as of 23 Aug 2009). Using the estimated denominator population of
323 400 symptomatic cases, this suggests a CRF of 0.005 per cent (95 per
cent CI: 0.003-0.011). This estimate is in the range found for seasonal
influenza in the population under the age of 65 years (according to data
from the United States [12] and various assumptions [11]). This impact
appears mild compared with the 1918 influenza pandemic in New Zealand,
which killed 0.7 per cent of the population [13] and which may have had a
CFR of around 2.0 per cent [14]. We can, however, speculate that those
people admitted to ICU today (114 so far in New Zealand) would not have
survived in 1918. On that basis, the comparable CFR estimate for the
current pandemic would be considerably higher at 0.04 per cent. Other
interventions, such as use of antivirals (mainly oseltamivir), antibiotics
to treat secondary bacterial pneumonia, and public communications have
probably also contributed to lowering the CFR. Developing countries without
access to such resources might, therefore, experience far more severe
health impacts than those seen in a developed country like New Zealand.

Vulnerable groups: some population groups appear more vulnerable to
influenza A(H1N1)v infection than others. A distinctive epidemiological
feature of pandemics is the shift in the age distribution to younger people
[15], and this feature was clearly evident in New Zealand. In addition,
there have been markedly higher rates of severe disease (as reflected by
the number of hospitalisations) for MCori (cumulative age-standardised
hospitalisation rate of 43.0/100 000) and Pacific peoples (94.2/100 000)
compared with Europeans and others (14.1/100,000). Similar ethnic
inequalities between Maori and non-Maori were seen for fatalities in the
1918 influenza pandemic in New Zealand [16]. The reasons for these
differences have not been established. However, Maori and Pacific peoples
in New Zealand experience marked health inequalities, and these are also
manifest for other infectious diseases [17]. Chronic health conditions have
been commonly reported for hospitalised cases (notably respiratory disease,
cardiac disease, diabetes, and immune suppression) along with some
infections in pregnant women.

Impact of school holidays: there is some evidence that the start of the
school holidays in New Zealand reduced influenza transmission and that the
return to school slightly accelerated the epidemic. In New Zealand, the
holidays for all schools lasted from Sat 4 Jul 2009 to Sun 19 Jul 2009 this
year (weeks 28 and 29). It is difficult to identify what impact the start
of the school holidays had as it coincided with what appears to have been
the natural peak of the pandemic. However, following the return to school
on Mon 20 Jul 2009, HealthStat GP consultation rates for school age groups
(5-14 years) increased and remained elevated for 3 weeks (weeks 30-32)
before continuing their downward trajectory in week 33. These relationships
require further in-depth analysis, but the overall effect on the pandemic
appears to have been small.

Public health response: New Zealand has a relatively well developed
pandemic plan that includes "keep it out", "stamp it out", "manage it", and
"recover" phases [18]. At the point of writing this article, the country is
continuing with the management stage. The 1st 2 containment stages were
applied from the 1st detection of imported cases on 25 Apr 2009 until 22
Jun 2009, when New Zealand formally switched to the "manage it" phase. The
considerable interval without reported cases during May 2009 (before the
epidemic accelerated in June 2009) provides some suggestive evidence for
the success of the containment measures, although this assessment requires
further evaluation.

Impact on health care services: the pandemic resulted in a heavy demand for
health services in those geographic areas where it was most intense. This
demand was experienced by general practices, emergency departments,
inpatient paediatric and adult medicine services, diagnostic laboratories,
as well as public health services. The impact was particularly marked in
ICUs because a relatively large proportion of hospitalised cases were
admitted to these units and because many patients stayed there for a
relatively long time. The demand on intensive care services peaked at 25
per cent of national ICU occupancy. The health services were not
overwhelmed, largely because of considerable additional time and effort by
staff, postponing and cancelling of non-urgent work, and also because the
numbers of infected people and the morbidity in this pandemic were lower
than had been initially expected.

Surveillance: the notifiable disease surveillance system was useful during
the containment stage for recording individual cases and supporting control
measures aimed at interrupting spread of the disease. Once New Zealand
moved into the management phase, this system ceased to provide a meaningful
indication of the progression of the pandemic, mainly because routine
laboratory testing of ILI patients was discouraged unless clinically
indicated. However, this system has increasingly been used for recording
hospitalisations and deaths, and the resulting dataset (EpiSurv),
therefore, provides insights into the more severe end of the disease
spectrum. The 2 GP surveillance systems have provided the most consistent
data about the progression of the pandemic. The sentinel GP system with
integrated epidemiological and virological surveillance has been
particularly valuable in estimating the disease burden, as it enables the
contribution from different circulating influenza strains to be measured.
The pilot testing of the Flutracker cross-sectional survey suggested that
this system has good potential for surveillance of more severe pandemics
which might overwhelm routine surveillance systems.

Limitations of this analysis: all of these surveillance systems have
considerable limitations. The cross-sectional survey (Flutracker) in
particular was run as a pilot and consequently had a relatively small
sample. Consequently, there is considerable uncertainty around the
multiplier this study has suggested for estimating ILI in the population
based on healthcare events (such as GP visits). It is reassuring that data
from a cross-sectional telephone survey in New York City suggested a very
similar multiplier (18.2) between physician visits and self-reported ILI
(this calculation is based on an estimated emergency department multiplier
of 60 and the ratio of 3.3 physician visits per emergency department visit
reported in this study) [19]. Sentinel surveillance data themselves were
affected by advice discouraging most patients with ILI from attending their
GP, which would have lowered the consultation rates compared with previous
years. Notification data include only a small proportion of all cases and
are unlikely to be representative of influenza A(H1N1)v virus infections in
the community. All of the findings presented here require more in-depth
analysis based on finalised data following the end of the pandemic.

Persisting uncertainties: similar patterns of a relatively short epidemic
have also be reported in other countries in the southern hemisphere,
notably Australia [2]. This pattern would be consistent with a range of
potential explanations. The lower levels of infections in older age groups
may be indicative of some existing immunity in the population. Certain
changes in behaviour may also have contributed to reducing the effective
reproduction number.

The largest uncertainties relate to the future development of this
pandemic. Previous pandemics tended to cause multiple waves over periods
between 2 and 5 years [15]. This present pandemic is causing widespread
illness with low mortality, which would be consistent with the 1st wave
seen in some previous pandemics. In other respects, it could be seen as
behaving like a typical seasonal influenza strain, which usually infects
5-10 per cent of the population over a period of about 8 weeks every winter
and then largely disappears. It would be prudent for health authorities to
plan for a range of pandemic scenarios that might unfold over the months
and years ahead. There is also a need to maintain existing surveillance
systems and supplement these with an operational research programme
including, for example, population sero-surveys to provide more accurate
estimates of the pandemic impact to date.

References
----------
1. Depoortere E, Mantero J, Lenglet A, Kreidl P, Coulombier D. Influenza
A(H1N1)v in the southern hemisphere - lessons to learn for Europe? Euro
Surveill 2009; 14(24): pii=19246. Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19246>.
2. Kelly H, Grant K. Interim analysis of pandemic influenza (H1N1) 2009 in
Australia: surveillance trends, age of infection and effectiveness of
seasonal vaccination. Euro Surveill 2009; 14(31): pii=19288. Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19288>.
3. Munayco CV, Gomez J, Laguna-Torres VA, Arrasco J, Kochel TJ, Fiestas V,
et al. Epidemiological and transmissibility analysis of influenza A(H1N1)v
in a southern hemisphere setting: Peru. Euro Surveill 2009; 14(32):
pii=19299. Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19299>.
4. Sue Huang Q, Lopez L, McCallum L, Adlam B. Influenza surveillance and
immunisation in New Zealand, 1997-2006. Influenza Other Respi Viruses 2008;
2(4): 139-45.
5. New Zealand Ministry of Health. Pandemic influenza (H1N1) 09 swine flu -
update 142. 24 Aug 2009. Available from
<http://www.moh.govt.nz/moh.nsf/indexmh/influenza-a-h1n1-update-142-240809>.
6. Huang QS, Bandaranayake D, Lopez L, Pirie R, Peacey M, Hall R, et al.
Novel influenza A (H1N1) and seasonal influenza virus surveillance, New
Zealand, April 2009 - July 2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2009; 58 (in press)
7. Hall RJ, Peacey MP, Ralston JC, Bocacao J, Ziki M, Gunn W, et al.
Pandemic influenza A(H1N1)v viruses currently circulating in New Zealand
are sensitive to oseltamivir. Euro Surveill 2009; 14(30): pii=19282.
Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19282>.
8. Nishiura H, Wilson N, Baker M. Estimating the reproduction number of the
novel influenza A virus (H1N1) in a Southern Hemisphere setting:
preliminary estimate in New Zealand. NZ Med J 2009; 122(1299): 73-7.
9. Carrat F, Vergu E, Ferguson NM, Lemaitre M, Cauchemez S, Leach S, et al.
Time lines of infection and disease in human influenza: A review of
volunteer challenge studies. Am J Epidemiol 2008; 167(7): 775-85.
10. Jackson G, Thornley S. Burden of novel influenza A virus (H1N1) in
Auckland and Counties Manukau DHBs (July): a capture-recapture analysis. NZ
Med J 2009; 122(1301)
11. Wilson N, Baker MG. The emerging influenza pandemic: estimating the
case fatality ratio. Euro Surveill 2009; 14(26): pii=19255. Available from
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19255>.
12. Thompson WW, Weintraub E, Dhankhar P, Cheng PY, Brammer L, Meltzer MI,
et al. Estimates of US influenza-associated deaths made using four
different methods. Influenza Other Respi Viruses 2009; 3(1): 37-49.
13. Rice G. Black November: The 1918 influenza pandemic in New Zealand.
Christchurch: Canterbury University Press; 2005.
14. Nishiura H, Wilson N. Transmission dynamics of the 1918 influenza
pandemic in New Zealand: analyses of national and city data. NZ Med J 2009;
122(1296): 81-6.
15. Miller MA, Viboud C, Balinska M, Simonsen L. The signature features of
influenza pandemics--implications for policy. N Engl J Med 2009; 360(25):
2595-8.
16. Wilson N, Baker M. Ninety years on: What we still need to learn from
"Black November" 1918 about pandemic influenza. NZ Med J 2008; 121(1285):
136-8.
17. Craig E, Jackson C, Han D, NZCYES Steering Committee. Monitoring the
health of New Zealand children and young people. Indicator handbook.
Auckland: Paediatric Society of New Zealand, New Zealand Child and Youth
Epidemiology Service; 2008.
18. New Zealand Ministry of Health. New Zealand Influenza Pandemic Action
Plan 2006. Wellington: Ministry of Health; September 2006. ISBN
0-478-30062-X (online). Available from
<http://www.moh.govt.nz/moh.nsf/indexmh/nz-influenza-pandemic-action-plan-2006>.

19. Metzger KB, Hajat A, Crawford M, Mostashari F. How many illnesses does
one emergency department visit represent? Using a population-based
telephone survey to estimate the syndromic multiplier. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2004; 53 Suppl: 106-11.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The influenza pandemic A (H1N1) 2009 virus, 1st identified in the United
States and Mexico, was imported into New Zealand by a high school group
returning from Mexico in late April 2009. By June 2009, sustained community
transmission of the virus had been established in New Zealand. All the
surveillance systems employed currently show a consistent decline in
pandemic disease rates in all areas of New Zealand. This decline cannot be
fully explained as New Zealand remains in the middle of its traditional
influenza season. The A (H1N1)v virus appears relatively infectious, but,
so far, only about 11 per cent of the population have been infected by this
novel agent. Although distinct differences in prevalence were observed in
different regions of New Zealand and among different racial/ethnic groups,
these may be due to underlying health and other inequalities.

Readers are referred also to: Surveillance for the 2009 pandemic influenza
A (H1N1) virus and seasonal influenza viruses -- New Zealand, 2009. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2009; 58(33): 918-21, 28 Aug
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5833a2.htm?s_cid=mm5833a2_e>. -
Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (34): Tamiflu shelf-life 20090826.3006
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (33): cases, fatalities 20090820.2955
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (32): Tamiflu use policy 20090817.2914
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (31): drug resistance 20090815.2900
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (30): assumptions 20090813.287
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (29): child treatment 20090811.2869
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (28): child treatment 20090811.2859
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (27): Viet Nam, patient data update
20090809.2819
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (26): update 20090807.2801
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (25): Australia, UK, updates 20090806.2784
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (24): global update 20090805.2766
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (23): (China, Taiwan), co-circ. H3N2
20090802.2713
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (22): Australia (NSW), swine 20090801.2698
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (21): vaccine priorities 20090730.2669
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (20): Peru, 33 percent asymptomatic
20090730.2668
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (10): vaccine 20090720.2577
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (08): pandemic origins 20090718.2559
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (06): case reporting 20090717.2553
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (05): vaccine 20090716.2540
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (04): pandemic origins 20090715.2527
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (03): vaccine 20090713.2505
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (02): obesity risk factor 20090711.2482
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 - Viet Nam: patient data 20090708.2450

.................cp/msp/sh



*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
