<header id=029596>
Published Date: 2011-12-02 12:40:09 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Die-off, marine wildlife - USA (04): (AK) seal, walrus, RFI
Archive Number: 20111202.3518
</header>
<body id=029596>
DIE-OFF, MARINE WILDLIFE - USA (04): (ALASKA) SEAL, WALRUS, REQUEST
FOR INFORMATION
***********************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 30 Nov 2011
Source: American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) [edited]
http://www.avma.org/onlnews/javma/dec11/111215m.asp


An international team of researchers is trying to identify what's
behind a disease outbreak among ringed seals, the most common ice seal
in the Northern Hemisphere.

A mysterious disease that's killed scores of ringed seals off the
Alaskan coast since the summer [2011] may also be infecting other
species of Arctic marine wildlife. The outbreak was first reported
this July [2011] along the North Slope of Alaska.

Severely ill and dead ringed seals were found with excessive hair loss
and lesions on their faces and flippers. Other signs associated with
the disease are delayed molt, lethargy, unusual behavior, and labored
breathing.

By late October [2011], government officials had received some 200
reports of sick or dead seals, mostly along the more than 200-mile
[300 km] expanse between the Alaskan cities of Point Lay to the south
and Barrow to the north. Approximately 50 animals were dead or died a
short time after being found.

Ringed seals are the most common and widely distributed of the Arctic
seal species. Since July [2011], ringed seals with the same telltale
signs of the mystery illness have been documented in Russia and
Canada.

Walruses with similar ulcerative skin lesions are turning up along the
North Slope and western coast of Alaska while harp seals with marked
hair loss have been sighted in Alaskan waters and around Greenland
--indicators the outbreak may not be isolated to ringed seals -- see:
http://www.alaskadispatch.com/article/walruses-suffer-similar-disease-afflicting-alaska-ringed-seals.

On 13 Oct [2011], the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
[NOAA], one of several US and Canadian entities investigating the
outbreak, issued a statement saying it was not known whether the same
disease is infecting multiple marine mammal species. Moreover, the
agency acknowledged that the cause of the ringed seal illnesses and
deaths had so far eluded discovery. "Laboratory findings have been
inconclusive to date, and scientists have not yet pinpointed a single
cause of this disease," NOAA explained. "A group of international
wildlife researchers continue to test for a wide range of possible
factors, including bacterial, viral, fungal, or toxic agents that may
be responsible for the animals' condition."

Samples have so far tested negative for poxvirus, parapoxvirus,
herpesvirus, papillomavirus, morbillivirus, and calicivirus and are
currently being tested for influenza virus.

Native communities living in the region hunt ringed seals and other
marine mammals for food, and government officials are advising them
against eating sick animals or feeding the meat to their dogs.

Clinical signs associated with the illness include skin ulcers and
lesions, pictured here on a seal's flippers and around another seal's
eyes [see picture at
http://www.avma.org/onlnews/javma/dec11/111215m.asp]. Dr Kathy
Burek, owner of Alaska Veterinary Pathology Services in Eagle River,
began assisting in the disease investigation this August [2011]. As of
early November [2011], Dr Burek had performed necropsies on 10 ringed
seal carcasses recovered from the North Slope.

The board-certified veterinary pathologist described the case animals
as having excessive hair loss across their bodies as well as
ulcerative and erosive lesions on their skin and inside their mouths.
In all the seals, one or more pathologic abnormalities have been
identified, including hepatitis; vasculitis and thrombosis in the
skin, lungs, and spleen; lymphadenopathy; and lymphoid depletion.

Some features of the histopathologic and epidemiologic findings, such
as unusual vacuolar changes, possible inclusions in the skin lesions,
and a lymphoplasmacytic necrotizing hepatitis, could indicate a virus
is behind the outbreak, Dr Burek explained, hence the intense search
for a primary viral etiology.

Dr Burek has also seen signs suggestive of disseminated intravascular
coagulation, including evidence of hemolysis and an unusual bleeding
tendency in affected animals that were still alive. And, although
vacuolar changes were evident in the cerebral and cerebellar white
matter of 2 carcasses -- a possible explanation for the abnormal
behavior -- Dr Burek says further testing is necessary to determine
whether the condition occurred while the animals were alive or after
they had died.

Dr Burek can't say with certainty what killed the seals, but she
suspects the animals were terminally septicemic. "It's not entirely
clear what the cause of death is, but septic shock appears most
likely, considering the lesions as well as the isolation of a variety
of different bacteria systemically from these animals," she said.

Alopecia and delayed molt have been observed in ringed seals around
Alaska for the past couple years, according to Alaska State
Veterinarian Bob Gerlach. He worries the recent cases of morbidity and
mortality, along with the possibility other marine mammal wildlife in
the Arctic are infected with the same agent, are signs of a more
serious issue.

"This may not just be a problem for a specific species of marine
mammals," Dr Gerlach said, "but could be a reflection of a larger
problem across the entire Arctic coastal ecosystem."

Dr Gerlach and others involved in the investigation speculate that no
single infectious agent or toxin is responsible for the outbreak.
Rather, they wonder whether the animals are succumbing to a complex
combination of stressors brought on by changes in their environment,
such as warmer air and ocean temperatures and a diminished sea ice
habitat. But determining how the warmer Arctic climate could be a
factor in the disease outbreak isn't easy. "The problem is how do you
establish any correlation or causation between these particular
disease issues and climate change?" noted Dr Burek, who has written
about the subject for the journal Ecological Applications. Despite the
challenges, Dr Burek believes the possibility cannot be ignored.
"Ringed seals are so dependent on the ice, you have to wonder if it's
not a part of the problem," she said. "It'd be unrealistic to think it
couldn't be."

[Byline: Scott Nolen]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Although the skin lesions and hair loss appear as a quite consistent
finding, a multi-factorial etiology is likely. An ecosystem health
problem behind this disease is very difficult to confirm, as pointed
out by Dr Burek. Nevertheless, it seems that the affected taxonomic
group are only marine carnivores (pinnipeds). Other marine animal
species die-offs were not reported. The text refers to "epidemiologic
findings", but these are not stated. Knowing more about the spatial
and temporal patterns, host factors associated with the occurrence of
the disease, etc., would be useful. - Mod.PMB]

[Photo of sick ringed seal:
http://nimg.sulekha.com/health/original700/sick-ringed-seals-2011-10-13-20-51-49.jpg.
- Mod.JW]
See Also
Die-off, harbor seals - USA: northeast, influenza susp. 20111106.3301
Die-off, marine wildlife - USA (03): (AK) seal, walrus 20070518.1580
Die-off, marine wildlife - USA (02): (AK) seal, RFI 20111014.3074
Die-off, marine wildlife - USA: (NH) RFI 20111012.3052
Q fever - USA (02): (AK) seals 20110911.2771
.................................................sb/pmb/mj/jw
</body>
