<header id=046596>
Published Date: 2011-10-29 07:29:23 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - Austria: cefixime
Archive Number: 20111029.3216
</header>
<body id=046596>
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE, NEISSERIA GONORRHOEAE - AUSTRIA: CEFIXIME
*****************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 17 Oct 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance 2011 16 (43) Article 3 [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19998


Gonorrhoea treatment failure in Austria, 2011
---------------------------------------------
We describe the 1st cefixime-resistant _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ strain
in Austria that caused treatment failure. It follows the 1st 5 cases
in Europe of cefixime treatment failure, reported in Norway in 2010
and the United Kingdom in 2011 [see ProMED-mail post Antibiotic
resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - UK: cefixime 20111012.3051].
Effective treatment of gonorrhoea is crucial for public health control
and, at present, requires substantially enhanced awareness, more
frequent test-of-cure, interaction with experts after therapeutic
failure, tracing and therapy of contacts, and surveillance of
gonococcal antimicrobial resistance and treatment failures worldwide.

We report here the 1st _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ strain with resistance
to cefixime in Austria, which caused a treatment failure with
cefixime.

Gonorrhoea is the 2nd most prevalent bacterial sexually transmitted
infection (STI) worldwide, and the aetiological agent, _N.
gonorrhoeae_, has developed resistance to all antimicrobials used as
1st-line treatments. In most countries, the currently recommended
1st-line drugs are the extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ESCs)
ceftriaxone (injectable) and cefixime (oral). However, the
susceptibility of _N. gonorrhoeae_ to both is decreasing worldwide
[1,2]. Cefixime standard treatment (400 mg single oral dose) has been
preferred in many countries due to its effectiveness, the ease of an
oral, single-dose regimen, and because, before 2010, verified
treatment failures had only been reported in Japan [3]. However, 2
cases of clinical failures with cefixime standard treatment were
described in 2010 in Norway [4], which were strictly verified using
the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria [1], and 3 cases in 2011
in the United Kingdom [5,6]. Furthermore, the 1st gonococcal strain
with high-level clinical resistance to ceftriaxone (the last remaining
option for empirical first-line treatment), i.e. the 1st extensively
drug-resistant gonococcus [1], was recently found in Japan [7]. It is
now possible that gonorrhoea will become untreatable in certain
circumstances and especially some settings [1,7].

Case report
-----------
In early July 2011, an Austrian man-who-has-sex-with-men (MSM) had
unprotected sex with one anonymous MSM in a gay sauna in Munich,
Germany. Some days later, the Austrian man presented to an urologist
in the region of Innsbruck, Austria (day 1), with symptoms of
urethritis (urethral discharge and dysuria) that had been present for
2 days. The patient was administered cefixime at a 400 mg oral dose
once a day for 7 days. On day 4, a urine sample taken on day 1 was
shown to contain _N. gonorrhoeae_ -- as well as _Chlamydia
trachomatis_-specific DNA using the Abbott m2000rt RealTime CT/NG PCR
(Abbott Molecular Diagnostics). On day 8, he presented to a general
practitioner with persisting symptoms, and the same treatment was
prescribed for an additional 14 days. On day 22, the patient returned
with persisting symptoms to the urologist he had visited initially,
and microscopy of a urethral smear displayed urethritis and
intracellular Gram-negative diplococci within polymorphonuclear
leukocytes. Furthermore, _N. gonorrhoeae_ was cultured from an
additional urethral sample taken on that day, and _N. gonorrhoeae_- as
well as _C. trachomatis_-specific DNA was found in a urine sample
using the Abbott PCR. The patient was on the same day given one oral
dose of 2 g azithromycin. On day 43, follow-up examination showed that
the symptoms and signs had resolved, and a PCR test (urine sample;
Abbott PCR) was negative for _N. gonorrhoeae_ as well as for _C.
trachomatis_). The patient repeatedly denied (on each visit) any
sexual activities after recognition of symptoms and, in particular,
between 1st treatment and test-of-cure.

Characterisation of the cefixime-resistant _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_
strain
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, no pre-treatment _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolate was
available. The post-treatment strain (cultured on day 22) was however
species-confirmed using culture on selective agar medium, rapid
oxidase production, presence of Gram-negative diplococci, and 2
species-verifying assays, an in house sugar utilisation test and
Phadebact GC Monoclonal Test (Bactus AB, Sweden). The results of the
characterisation of the strain are summarised in the Table.

The strain was assigned to serovar Bpyut, multilocus sequence typing
(MLST) ST1901 and _N. gonorrhoeae_ multiantigen sequence typing
(NG-MAST) ST1407, performed as previously described [7,8]. The strain
had minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 5 antimicrobial drugs
as follows: 1.0 mg/L of cefixime (average of 0.8 mg/L in 4 Etest
determinations), 0.5 mg/L of ceftriaxone (average of 0.3 mg/L in 4
Etest determinations), 0.25 mg/L of azithromycin, 8 mg/L of
spectinomycin, and >32 mg/L of ciprofloxacin (see Table). Accordingly,
the strain was resistant to cefixime (>0.12 mg/L), ceftriaxone (>0.12
mg/L), and ciprofloxacin (>32 mg/L), based on the breakpoints stated
by the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing
(EUCAST) [9]. The strain did not produce any beta-lactamase.

Sequencing of resistance determinants for penicillins and ESCs (penA,
mtrR, porB1b, ponA and pilQ alterations) were performed as previously
described [7,8,10]. The strain contained a penA mosaic XXXIV allele
[7] with a single additional amino acid alteration (T534A) in the gene
for penicillin binding protein 2, and additionally the mtrR and penB
resistance determinants, which all together caused the high MICs of
the ESCs [7,10,11] (Table). Transformation experiments, performed as
previously described [7,12], confirmed that the only new resistance
determinant, i.e. the novel penA mosaic allele (penA mosaic XXXIV
allele with an additional T534A alteration), was responsible for the
resistance to ESCs.

Discussion
--------------
We report here the 1st _N. gonorrhoeae_ strain with resistance to
cefixime in Austria, which caused a treatment failure with the
internationally recommended 1st-line treatment cefixime. This
treatment failure as well as 2 of the 3 previously reported ones in
the United Kingdom [5,6] occurred in MSM, and an enhanced focus on
prevention and control of gonorrhoea in MSM may be necessary. The
present treatment failure was identified in an Austrian patient,
however, the infection was contracted in Germany, which suggests that
this strain may be present in the MSM community in Germany.

Because no pre-treatment isolate was available, the same situation as
for 2 of the 3 reported cases of cefixime treatment failures in the
United Kingdom [5,6], it was not possible to verify the treatment
failure in full accordance to the WHO criteria [1]. However, a
detailed clinical history was recorded, reinfection was ruled out as
much as is possible (denied on each visit by the patient), the
post-treatment isolate was in vitro highly resistant to cefixime, and
the strain contained genetic resistance determinants explaining the
high cefixime MIC. Furthermore, the high cefixime MIC of the strain
makes it most likely that this was a treatment failure.

According to Monte Carlo simulations, a 400 mg dose of cefixime
results in a median time of free cefixime above MIC (fT>MIC) of only
6.8 h (3.8-9.6 h) for the detected MIC of 1.0 mg/L [13]. Furthermore,
one day (ca. 24 h) after administration of 400 mg cefixime the
concentration of free cefixime is very low (ca. 0.03 mg/L) [13].
Consequently, especially due to the short half life of cefixime (3.4
hours) administration of one 400 mg dose per day for several days does
not substantially extend the cefixime fT>MIC unless the MIC of the
strain is relatively low [13]. This regimen accordingly does not
provide any major benefits, compared with the recommended cefixime
single-dose regimen, for the treatment of gonorrhoea, is evidently not
able to clear an infection with a gonococcal strain that has an MIC of
cefixime of 1.0 mg/L; rather, it may select for higher ESC resistance.
This emphasises the importance of adhering to appropriate treatment
guidelines (i.e. using a 400 mg cefixime single-dose regimen, and, if
failure is confirmed or suspected, another antimicrobial drug), and of
involving STI experts when the commonly used recommended treatment
fails in a patient.

It is now evident that cefixime treatment failures have occurred in
several European countries. In many cases they may not be recognised
because azithromycin is additionally administered to many of the
gonorrhoea patients (due to suspicion of chlamydial infection) [1,13],
follow-up examination and test-of-cure are rarely performed [1], or
treatment failures are not appropriately verified and reported. The
recently updated treatment guidelines in the United States [14] and
the United Kingdom [15] recommend cefixime 400 mg only as an
alternative treatment (if ceftriaxone is not an option), and this
change may need to be considered also in the European [16] and other
treatment guidelines. In all countries, it is crucial to maintain as
much capacity as possible to culture and perform antimicrobial
resistance (AMR) testing of gonococci, for AMR surveillance purposes
but also for adequate verification of treatment failures and, if
needed, for informing the antimicrobial treatment of individual
patients.

The present treatment failure was caused by a gonococcal strain of
ST1407, which is multidrug-resistant and is spreading in many
countries worldwide [17,18]. ST1407 or closely related subtypes also
caused the recent treatment failures in Norway [4] and the United
Kingdom [5].

In conclusion, clinical failures of gonorrhoea treatment with the
internationally recommended 1st-line treatment cefixime have occurred
in 3 European countries. Improved prevention (e.g., condom use) and
control of gonorrhoea, enhanced awareness of cefixime treatment
failures, more frequent follow-up examination including test-of-cure
and appropriate collection of demographic and behavioural data (e.g.,
sexual orientation), and surveillance of gonococcal AMR and treatment
failures (appropriately verified and subsequently reported) are
crucial worldwide to mitigate the spread and minimise the impact of
ESC-resistant gonococcal strains and, accordingly, to ensure that
gonorrhoea remains a treatable infection. Furthermore, adherence to
appropriate treatment guidelines and timely evidence-based revision of
these guidelines, involvement of STI experts when the commonly used
recommended treatment fails in a patient, as well as tracing and
therapy also of sexual contacts of the index case are imperative.

[References are available at
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19998]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alert
<promed@promedmail.org>

[For a discussion of cefixime-resistance in _N. gonorrhoeae_, see
ProMED-mail post Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - UK:
cefixime 20111012.3051 and for a discussion of reduced cephalosporin
susceptibility among _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolates in the United States,
see CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 8 Jul 2011;
60(26): 873-7
(http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6026a2.htm). - Mod.ML

The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map for Austria is available at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1nDX - CopyEd.EJP]
See Also
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - UK: cefixime 20111012.3051
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - Japan: ceftriaxone 20110713.2114
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA (CA) azithromycin 20110613.1800
2009
----
N. gonorrhoeae, fluoroquinolone resistance - Canada: (ON) 20090215.0648
2007
----
Antibiotic resistance, N. gonorrhoeae- USA: fluoroquinolones 20070413.1229
2002
----
Gonorrhea, multidrug resistant - USA (CA, HI) 20020510.4150
2000
----
Antibiotic resistance, gonococci - USA 20001222.2257
Antibiotic resistance, gonococci - UK (Scotland) 20001209.2164
1998
----
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA 19980401.0603
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA (02) 19980531.1043
.................................................sb/ml/ejp/dk
</body>
