<header id=019518>
Published Date: 2011-03-23 15:00:07 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Poliomyelitis - worldwide (03): Rep. Congo, Pakistan, Africa
Archive Number: 20110323.0919
</header>
<body id=019518>
POLIOMYELITIS - WORLDWIDE (03): REPUBLIC OF CONGO, PAKISTAN, AFRICA
*******************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

In this update:
[1] Rep. Congo
[2] Pakistan
[3] Africa 2009-2010

******
[1] Rep. Congo
Date: 18 Mar 2011
Source: Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), 18 Mar 2011,
60(10);312-313 [edited]
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6010a4.htm?s_cid=mm6010a4_w>


Notes from the Field: Poliomyelitis Outbreak --- Republic of the
Congo, September 2010--February 2011
--------------------------------
On [4 Nov 2010], a case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) was
confirmed in a resident of the port city, Pointe Noire, the 1st WPV
case in Republic of the Congo (ROC) in 10 years. The WPV1 isolate from
this resident was genetically most closely related to WPV1 isolated in
Angola in 2010. Subsequent investigation, including active case
finding, revealed increased acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) hospital
admissions beginning in September [2010].

Weekly admissions rose from approximately 10 AFP patients in early
October [2010] to approximately 80 by the end of October and November
[2010]. With response immunization activities, weekly AFP admissions
fell to fewer than 5 by the end of December [2010]. A provisional
total of 554 AFP cases were identified nationally, with paralysis
onset from [20 Sep 2010] to [27 Feb 2011]; 374 (68 percent) of the AFP
cases were among males. Overall, 465 (84 percent) AFP cases were among
residents of the neighboring departments of Kouilou and Pointe Noire,
where the outbreak apparently began and where approximately 21 percent
of ROC's 4.2 million persons reside. The case-fatality rate (CFR) in
Kouilou and Pointe Noire was 40 percent (187 deaths of 465 cases),
compared with 11 percent (10 of 89) elsewhere in ROC. Additionally,
the median age of patients with AFP in Kouilou and Pointe Noire was 20
years (range: 0--63 years), compared with 7.5 years (range: 1--68
years) elsewhere in ROC.

Vaccination status was unknown for all but 149 of the 554 AFP
patients. Among those with known vaccination status, 107 (72 percent)
reported having received at least one oral polio vaccine (OPV) dose,
and 73 of those patients reported receiving at least 3 doses of OPV.

As of [8 Mar 2011], WPV1 had been confirmed virologically in
specimens from 70 AFP patients. Adequate stool specimens were not
available for 468 (84 percent) patients, of whom 190 died;
nonetheless, 32 (46 percent) of the 70 WPV cases were confirmed among
those 468 patients. Because investigation of the outbreak was
compromised by the collection of adequate specimens from only 16
percent of patients, the clinical classification algorithm of AFP
cases was used. Patients without adequate specimens who died, were
lost to follow-up, or had residual paralysis on follow-up were
considered to have clinically confirmed polio. This algorithm was
applicable when adequate stool specimens were collected for fewer than
65 percent of cases (4) and was last used in countries of the World
Health Organization African Region in 2000. Provisionally, 317
additional patients have been classified as having clinically
confirmed polio. Thus, as of [8 Mar 2011], the total number of
confirmed polio cases was 387, pending further laboratory
investigation, follow-up, and review.

Outbreak control efforts have included 4 rounds of national
supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) targeting the entire
population of ROC, beginning [12-16 Nov 2010] with a round of
monovalent type 1 OPV. Subsequent SIA rounds were conducted [3-7 Dec
2010], using monovalent type 1 OPV; [11-15 Jan 2011], using bivalent
(types 1 and 3) OPV; and [22-26 Feb 2011], using bivalent OPV. The 1st
3 SIA rounds were coordinated with areas of other countries
neighboring Kouilou (Cabinda in Angola and Bas-Congo in Democratic
Republic of the Congo), where outbreak cases subsequently were
reported; the 4th round was synchronized with neighboring Gabon, where
a WPV confirmed case occurred in January [2011].

This outbreak appears nearly controlled, with onset of the most
recent confirmed WPV case on [22 Jan 2011]. Only 14 AFP cases have
been reported provisionally in 2011, approximating the expected
background frequency in ROC. Preliminary results suggest that several
factors contributed to this outbreak 10 years after the last confirmed
WPV1 case in ROC. These include a low rate of childhood polio
vaccination among young adults and a protracted period without WPV1
transmission in the area. Vaccination coverage has been low over the
last 2 decades,* secondary to weaknesses in the delivery of
health-care and routine vaccination services, complicated by civil war
and conflict during 1997--1999. The last national SIA was in 2006.
Other possible contributing factors are crowding of residents and
severe limitations in water supply and sanitation. The high proportion
of cases among adolescents and adults (who are known to be at higher
risk for bulbar paralysis than children) might have contributed to the
high CFR, which might have been accentuated by suboptimal medical care
and delays in seeking care. CFRs of 12-32 percent have been observed
in previous WPV1 outbreaks involving adults (1--3). An investigation
is ongoing to determine reasons for the elevated CFR in Kouilou and
Pointe Noire.

All international travelers are advised to have completed a primary
series of polio vaccinations before travel (5,6). Travelers from the
United States to countries with recent WPV transmission or countries
neighboring them also should receive a single adult booster
inactivated poliovirus vaccine dose before departure.** Travelers who
are inadequately vaccinated against polio or whose past vaccination
history is uncertain should contact their physician to discuss polio
vaccination options before traveling. The World Health Organization
recommends that all travelers who reside in countries with WPV
transmission not only complete a course of vaccination against polio,
preferably with OPV, before leaving the country of residence, but also
receive an additional dose of OPV within 12 months before each
international trip (6). However, whether many travelers from countries
with WPV transmission follow these recommendations, except when
required (e.g., pilgrimage to Mecca), is uncertain (7).

Reported by:
Ministry of Health, Republic of the Congo; World Health Organization
Republic of the Congo Country Office, World Health Organization
Regional Office for Africa, Brazzaville; Republic of the Congo. Dept
of Polio Eradication, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Div of Viral Diseases and Global Immunization Div, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC.

References
1. Prevots DR, Ciofi Degli Atti M, Sallabanda A, et al. Outbreak of
paralytic poliomyelitis in Albania, 1996. Clin Infect Dis
1998:26;419--25. [Abstract and 1st page available at:
<http://www.jstor.org/pss/4481370>]
2. CDC. Outbreak of poliomyelitis---Cape Verde, 2000. MMWR
2000;49:1070. [Available at:
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4947a5.htm>]
3. CDC. Outbreak of polio in adults---Namibia, 2006. MMWR
2006;55:1198--201. [Available at:
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5544a3.htm>
4. World Health Organization. Field guide for supplementary
activities aimed at achieving polio eradication. Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization; 1997. Available at
<http://www.who.int/immunization_monitoring/resources/Field_guide_polio_96.pdf>
Accessed [14 Mar 2011].
5. CDC. Travelers' health. Atlanta, GA: US Dept of Health and Human
Services, CDC. Available at <http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel>. Accessed
[14 Mar 2011].
6. World Health Organization. International travel and health 2010.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization Press; 2010. Available
at <http://www.who.int/ith/chapters/en/index.html> Accessed [14 Mar
2011].
7. World Health Organization. Health conditions for travellers to
Saudi Arabia for the pilgrimage to Mecca (Hajj). Wkly Epidemiol Rec
2010;85:425--36. [Available at:
<http://www.who.int/wer/2010/wer8543.pdf>

* Information available at
<http://apps.who.int/immunization_monitoring/en/globalsummary/timeseries/tswucoveragebycountry.cfm?country=cod>

** Information available at
<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/content/in-the-news/polio-outbreaks.aspx>.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[According to the Polio Eradication initiative website, as of 16 Mar
2011, one case of WPV1 in Kouilou province with onset of paralysis on
28 Nov 2010 was reported in the preceding week, bringing the 2010
total number of cases to 384. There has only been one case with onset
in 2011, a WPV1 case with date of onset 22 Jan 2011. There were NIDs
using bOPV (bivalent) held from 22 Feb 2011 (see
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Dataandmonitoring/Poliothisweek.aspx>).
Given the delays in reporting of cases, it appears too soon to declare
the outbreak over.

For a map of the Republic of the Congo, see
<http://mappery.com/maps/Congo-1986-Guide-Map.gif>. - Mod.MPP]

******
[2] Pakistan
Date: 22 Mar 2011
Source: The News [edited]
<http://www.thenews.com.pk/TodaysPrintDetail.aspx?ID=37380&Cat=4>


Two new cases of polio have been detected in Sindh, taking the total
number of such cases to 5 in the province and 20 in the entire
country, officials said.

In a rare case, a 17-year-old youngster in Tando Muhammad Khan has
been found suffering from the disease.

Besides, a one-year-old girl in District Badin has also been
diagnosed with polio virus despite the fact that she has received 6
routine and 3 supplementary doses, officials in the Expanded Programme
on Immunisation told The News on Monday [21 Mar 2011].

The fresh polio cases in the country have been reported at a time
when the 1st national immunisation campaign has concluded less than a
couple of weeks back, from [7-10 Mar 2011], and authorities claimed to
cover 95 per cent areas of each union council in the country.

Polio virus of type-A [WPV type 1?] was detected in a one-year-old
girl, a resident of District Badin, Mazhar Khamisani, the EPI Sindh
Director said.

He said that the child's vaccination status was 3 + 6; that means she
received 12 doses of the vaccine last year [2010], while she was found
infected with P-1 type virus.

On the other hand, a 17-year-boy was also found suffering from polio
in Tando Muhammad Khan, and initial investigation revealed that he
never had routine polio vaccination in his entire life.

Dr Khamisani said that earlier in 2008, a 27-year-old man was also
found suffering from polio in the Punjab, and now it was the 2nd case
in which an adult had become a victim of the dreaded disease.

"A 17-year-old boy whose limbs were weakening, and when tested, he
was found suffering from polio [in the village Somar, Tando Muhammad
Khan]," the EPI official added.

It is worth mentioning here that last week, a one-year-old [boy] of
the same area, Tando Muhammad Khan, was confirmed as the 3rd polio
victim in the province.

National EPI officials further confirmed to The News that 2 more
cases of polio were also detected in Peshawar and Nowshera in Khyber
Pakhtunkhawa, taking the total number of polio victims in the entire
country so far to 20.

While responding to queries about the latest polio case in Badin, the
female child who had 9 doses of vaccine, Dr Mazhar Khamisani said that
poor sanitary conditions and malnutrition could be the possible causes
of polio virus infection in the child.

"If sanitary conditions are not proper, and the child is suffering
from malnutrition, even 50 doses can't prevent him or her from getting
infected from the virus," he added.

Similarly, the 17-year-old boy was from the area where he never
received even a single dose of polio vaccine, and the virus attacked
him when he contacted it with no immunity against it.

[Byline: M. Waqar Bhatti]

--
Communicated by:
HealthMap Alerts via ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[According to the Polio Eradication Initiative website, for the week
ending 16 Mar 2011, there had been 2 WPV1 cases reported in the
country, bringing the total number of cases in 2011 to 15. The most
recent confirmed case had onset of paralysis on 2 Mar 2011 in Killa
Abdulah, Balochistan, in the east of the country. By comparison, the
total number of confirmed cases in 2010 was 144. These 2 cases
mentioned in the above newswire are from Sindh province in the south
of the country (see the interactive HealthMap/ProMED map at
<http://healthmap.org/r/02SY>).

There was a nationwide vaccination campaign using trivalent [tOPV]
from 1-9 Mar 2011. Lot Quality Assurance Sampling (LQAS) results after
the campaign suggest continued quality issues, particularly in
high-risk districts, and are currently under investigation. The next
planned SIAs [supplementary immunization activities] will be SNIDs
[subnational immunization days] on 4-6 Apr 2011 using bOPV (bivalent).
Additional SIAs are planned for May and June 2011.

For a map of the location of polio cases confirmed in Pakistan during
2011 (as of 16 Mar 2011), see the worldwide distribution map at
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Dataandmonitoring.aspx>. - Mod.MPP]

******
[3]
Date: 18 Mar 2011
Source: Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report 18 Mar 2011,
60(10);306-311 [edited]
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6010a3.htm?s_cid=mm6010a3_w>


Progress Toward Interrupting Wild Poliovirus Circulation in Countries
With Reestablished Transmission --- Africa, 2009--2010
-------------------------------------
Through efforts of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI),
begun in 1988, indigenous transmission of wild poliovirus (WPV) had
been interrupted in all but 4 countries (Afghanistan, Pakistan, India,
and Nigeria) by 2006 (1). Since 2002, a total of 39 previously
polio-free countries experienced outbreaks following importation of
WPV of Indian or Nigerian origin (2--4). Most outbreaks were stopped
less than 6 months after confirmation. However, circulation in Angola,
Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and Sudan persisted
greater than 12 months following importation before 2009 (3,4).

A key milestone of the GPEI 2010--2012 strategic plan (5) was to
interrupt WPV transmission in these African countries with
reestablished transmission by the end of 2010. As of [8 Mar 2011], the
milestone appeared to be on track only in Sudan. In Sudan, WPV type 1
(WPV1) was introduced in 2004, but no cases were detected for a
31-month period during 2005--2008. When resurgence occurred in 2008,
surveillance and eradication efforts were enhanced, and no case has
been detected since June 2009. In Chad, WPV type 3 (WPV3) transmission
has persisted since 2007, although undetected for 7 months in 2010. In
Angola, WPV1 circulation has persisted following importation in 2007,
and became more widespread in 2010, with subsequent importations into
DRC and Republic of the Congo (ROC).

In DRC, WPV1 circulation has persisted since introduction in 2006.
Achieving polio eradication depends on stopping WPV transmission in
the 4 endemic countries and overcoming substantial, ongoing
programmatic weaknesses in Chad, Angola, and DRC.

Methods of Tracking Progress
The 2010--2012 GPEI strategic plan set several milestones. These
included 1) stopping WPV transmission following importation in
countries with outbreaks in 2009 by mid-2010, 2) stopping WPV
transmission in subsequent outbreaks less than 6 months after
confirmation, 3) stopping WPV transmission in countries with
reestablished transmission by the end of 2010, 4) stopping WPV
transmission in at least 2 of the 4 WPV-endemic countries by the end
of 2011, and 5) stopping WPV transmission in all countries by the end
of 2012.

The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF provide annual
estimates of routine coverage with 3 doses of oral poliovirus vaccine
(OPV) by age 12 months (OPV3) for each country.* WPV cases are
identified through acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance and
testing of stool specimens for polioviruses in WHO-accredited
laboratories. Quality standards for AFP surveillance include detection
of greater than or equal to 2 cases of nonpolio AFP (NPAFP) (AFP with
no WPV isolated from adequate specimens) per 100 000 population aged
less than 15 years in all provinces or states and adequate stool
specimen collection from greater than or equal to 80 percent of AFP
cases.**

Vaccination recall histories collected on children aged 6--35 months
with onset of NPAFP in 2010 are used to assess target population
vaccination status (the proportion with greater than or equal to 4 OPV
doses and the proportion with no OPV doses) at the time of AFP onset.
Independent monitors assess the quality of implementation of
supplementary immunization activities (SIAs)*** in areas considered at
high risk by surveying the proportion of children missed in the SIA.
Monitoring activities are variable; they are intended to provide a
crude assessment of SIA quality and to identify areas needing
improvement.

The Global Polio Laboratory Network provides comprehensive genomic
sequencing of WPV isolates (6), enabling tracing of the origins of
virus importations into previously polio-free areas**** and estimation
of the duration of circulation in chains of transmission. Angola,
Chad, DRC, and southern Sudan were identified in 2009 as having
reestablished WPV transmission (7) because genomic sequence analysis
had shown the persistence of one or more chains of WPV transmission
for greater than 12 months.

WPV Status by Country

Chad
WPV3 transmission persisted in Chad after importation from Nigeria in
2007 (1,3) resulting in 79 cases in Chad during 2009--2010 in 17 of 18
provinces ([see Table, Figures 1 and 2 at above given URL]) and
further spread to Cameroon and Central African Republic in 2009 (1,4).
The monthly case count decreased after improvements in SIA
implementation in 2010 (see Figure 2 at above given URL). No WPV3 case
was detected during [10 May-23 Dec 2010], but a related WPV3 case was
detected in December 2010, and genetic sequencing for an additional
WPV3 case detected in January 2011 is being conducted. A new WPV 1
importation from Nigeria in September 2010 resulted in 11 cases during
2010 (and 5 cases in 2011, as of [8 Mar 2011]).

Estimated OPV3 coverage in Chad was 36 percent; 52 percent of NPAFP
patients had greater than or equal to 4 doses of OPV, and 11 percent
had no doses. Independent monitoring of SIA coverage indicated that 26
percent of children were missed in the February 2010 SIA. Following an
initiative in March 2010, monitoring showed some SIA improvements in
Chad; the percentage of children missed decreased to greater than or
equal to 20 percent during 8 of the 10 SIAs implemented during
March--December 2010.

AFP surveillance met standards for case detection but not for
specimen collection ([see Table at above given URL]). Only 65 percent
of AFP cases had adequate stool specimens. Difficulties in
international shipment of specimens to an accredited Global Poliovirus
Network Laboratory contributed to greater than 20 percent of the
specimens arriving at the laboratory in poor condition.

Sudan
WPV1 of Nigerian origin was imported into Sudan via Chad in 2004,
resulting in transmission in northern and southern Sudan during
2004--2005 and importation into 8 other countries (2). Ongoing
transmission of WPV1 from this importation was not detected during
August 2005--March 2008. Subsequently, a total of 70 WPV1 cases were
reported in Sudan through June 2009, and associated WPV1 outbreaks
occurred in 2009 in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda (1,3) (Figures 1 and
2). Since the 2004 importation, 226 related WPV1 cases have been
reported in Sudan, including 82 in southern Sudan ([see Table at above
given URL]). Following the 2008--2009 resurgence, extensive assistance
was provided to improve SIA implementation and AFP surveillance in
southern Sudan.

Overall, 78 percent of children with NPAFP in Sudan were reported to
have received greater than or equal to 4 doses of OPV; estimated OPV3
coverage was 84 percent; 3.8 percent of NPAFP cases nationwide had no
OPV doses. Among children with NPAFP residing in the 10 states of
southern Sudan, 7.3 percent had received no OPV doses. Limited
independent SIA monitoring data indicated less than 15 percent of
children were missed in all but one state in November 2010 and less
than 10 percent in all states in December [ 2010].

Surveillance indicators did not meet standards in early 2009. In
2010, however, all 25 states met surveillance quality targets,
including the 10 states of southern Sudan, which had a NPAFP rate of
4.2 per 100 000 population aged less than 15 years and an adequate
stool collection rate of 94 percent.

Angola
In less than a decade, Angola has had 3 separate WPV importations
related to WPV last isolated from cases in India. A 2005 WPV1
importation resulted in an outbreak that lasted until 2007 and led to
outbreaks in Namibia, DRC, Central African Republic, and Burundi
(3,4). A 2nd WPV1 importation was associated with 74 polio cases in
Angola during 2007--2010 ([see Table at above given URL]), and this
reestablished transmission has continued into 2011. A WPV3 importation
in 2008 was followed by transmission in Angola in 2008 and cases in
DRC during 2008--2009 (1,3). Of the 29 WPV1 cases in Angola with onset
during 2009, a total of 14 (48 percent) were reported from the
capital, Luanda, and 14 (48 percent) from the western provinces.
During 2010, a total of 18 of 32 (56 percent) WPV1 cases were detected
in central Angola and at the eastern border with DRC, leading to
spread to DRC ([see Table, Figures 1 and 2 at above given URL]) and
into ROC (387 provisionally confirmed cases) in 2010 (8).

Estimated OPV3 coverage in Angola was 73 percent *****; 30 percent of
NPAFP patients reported having received greater than or equal to 4
doses, and 13 percent of NPAFP patients reported no doses. Independent
monitoring after SIAs in 2010 indicated that 7--17 percent of children
were missed in SIAs, overall; greater than 33 percent of provinces
consistently have greater than or equal to 10 percent children
missed.

AFP surveillance indicators met performance targets in 2009 and 2010
([see Table at above given URL]). However, genomic sequence analysis
of WPV1 isolates suggested multiple instances of undetected
transmission in Angola.

DRC [Democratic Republic of the Congo] WPV1 cases occurred during
2006--2008 after being introduced from Angola, with no WPV1 case
detected in 2009. During 2010, 6 WPV1 cases were identified in Katanga
Province in southeastern DRC, where Tanzania and DRC are separated by
Lake Tanganyika. The cases were genetically most closely related to
WPV1 detected in DRC in 2008 and 2 related WPV1 cases reported from
Burundi in 2009 ([see Figure 1 at above given URL]) (1,4). This
indicates periods of undetected transmission in eastern DRC and
bordering areas. No further related cases have been identified since
October 2010. Early in 2010, a new importation of WPV1 from Angola
resulted in an outbreak that started in a southern border province of
DRC and spread to neighboring provinces. Two additional WPV1
importations from Angola were identified in Bas-Congo Province in
2010. Four WPV3 cases linked to 2 2008 importations from Angola
occurred during October 2008--June 2009 (Table, Figure 1).

Estimated OPV3 coverage in DRC was 73 percent; 28 percent of patients
with NPAFP reported having received greater than or equal to 4 doses
of OPV, and 12 percent of NPAFP patients reported having received no
doses. Subnational SIAs implemented in 2010 covered 20--65 percent of
the national aged less than 5 years target population; independent
monitoring data for the 2 most recent targeted 2010 SIAs in Bandundu
and Kasai-Occidental provinces indicated 11--16 percent of children
were missed. Independent monitoring of the 2 most recent 2010
subnational SIAs indicated that 8 percent of children were missed.

AFP surveillance met standard detection targets in 2010 throughout
DRC, and 75 percent of AFP cases had adequate specimen collection.
However, genomic sequence analysis of WPV isolated from patients in
Katanga Province substantiate that AFP surveillance missed chains of
transmission in the eastern provinces.

Reported by:
Polio Eradication Dept, World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland. Div of Viral Diseases, Global Immunization Div, National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC.

MMWR Editorial Note
The 2010 GPEI 2010--2012 strategic plan milestone of ending
reestablished transmission by the end of 2010 appears to be on track
in Sudan.****** The milestone was missed in Angola and is at high risk
for being missed in Chad and DRC. Persistent WPV transmission in
Angola, Chad, DRC, and Sudan has led to outbreaks in 8 polio-free
countries, some resulting in substantial morbidity and mortality, as
in ROC (3,4,8), and outbreak response activities have diverted limited
resources. Achieving the GPEI milestone of ending all WPV transmission
by the end of 2012 depends on progress being made in Angola, Chad,
DRC, and the 4 WPV-endemic countries during 2011. Progress toward
other milestones of the strategic plan is broadly on track. Among the
4 endemic countries, India and Nigeria made notable progress during
2010.*******

Among countries with outbreaks following importation, all 15
countries affected by outbreaks in 2009 had their last WPV case before
mid-2010. Of the 11 countries with new importations in 2010, 7 appear
to have stopped transmission within 6 months of confirmation, and the
others with more recent transmission also appear to be on track to
meet the milestone. One importation has been reported to date in 2011;
a WPV1 case was recently confirmed in Gabon, with onset in January
2011, related to the outbreak in ROC (8).

In Chad, southern Sudan, Angola, and DRC, the health infrastructure
is weak, routine vaccination coverage in multiple areas is very low,
and SIAs repeatedly have failed to reach a sufficient proportion of
children in critical areas. SIA quality improvements during 2009--2010
in southern Sudan were the result of more effective governmental
engagement and increased external support. All 4 countries with
reestablished WPV transmission have experienced civil war in the
recent past. Southern Sudan continued to have civil unrest, but
security has improved within the last 2 years. In January 2011, voters
in southern Sudan passed a referendum for independence. The security
situation in southern Sudan will require close monitoring as the
anticipated transition progresses.

Areas of insecurity and civil unrest remain in eastern Chad and in
eastern DRC, and resources are scarce. Angola, however, has had both
the stability and resources to improve the quality of SIA
implementation and AFP surveillance. Angola recently served as the WPV
source for active outbreaks in 3 countries. Continued WPV transmission
during 2010--2011 in Angola, Chad, and DRC indicates that sufficient
improvements in polio eradication activities have not occurred.
Virologic evidence of undetected transmission has demonstrated
deficiencies in surveillance, sometimes even when performance
indicators meet international standards. These deficiencies signify
ongoing weaknesses in AFP detection, investigation, specimen
collection, and/or transport in major areas of the country.

Urgent, coordinated efforts by governmental and external partners are
needed to immediately address the substantial, ongoing weaknesses in
SIAs and surveillance in Angola and DRC, and to redouble efforts in
Chad to continue the progress toward eliminating WPV. Sustaining
polio-free status also requires strengthening routine immunization. At
the outset of 2011, GPEI partner agency leaders visited heads of state
of Angola and DRC to emphasize the urgency of the situation, advocate
for increased efforts, and extend offers of further support. To
achieve measurable operational improvements and interrupt WPV
transmission in these countries, these renewed efforts must begin
immediately.

References
1. CDC. Progress toward interruption of wild poliovirus
transmission---worldwide, 2009. MMWR 2010;59:545--50. [available at:
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5918a1.htm>]
2. CDC. Resurgence of wild poliovirus type 1 transmission and
consequences of importation---21 countries, 2002--2005. MMWR
2006;55:145--50. [available at:
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5506a1.htm>]
3. CDC. Wild poliovirus type 1 and type 3 importations---15
countries, Africa, 2008--2009. MMWR 2009;58:357--62. [available at:
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5814a1.htm>]
4. CDC. Outbreaks following wild poliovirus importations---Europe,
Africa, and Asia, January 2009--September 2010. MMWR 2010;59:1393--9.
[available at: <http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5943a1.htm>]
5. World Health Organization. Global Polio Eradication Initiative:
strategic plan 2010--2012. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization; 2010. Available at
<http://www.polioeradication.org/content/publications/gpei.strategicplan.2010-2012.eng.may.2010.pdf>
Accessed [8 Mar 2011].
6. CDC. Laboratory surveillance for wild and vaccine-derived
polioviruses---worldwide, January 2008--June 2009. MMWR
2009;58:950--4. [available at:
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5834a3.htm>]
7. World Health Organization. Conclusions and recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Poliomyelitis Eradication, November 2009. Wkly
Epidemiol Rec 2010:85;1--11. [Available at
<http://www.who.int/wer/2010/wer8501_02.pdf>]
8. CDC. Poliomyelitis outbreak---Republic of the Congo, 2010. MMWR
2011;60:312--3. [see [1] Rep. Congo report above, or go to
<http://cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6010a4.htm>]

* Reported coverage data and WHO/UNICEF estimates are available at
<http://www.who.int/immunization_monitoring/en/globalsummary/countryprofileselect.cfm>.

** AFP surveillance quality is monitored by performance indicators.
Certification standard WHO targets are a NPAFP detection rate of one
case per 100 000 population aged under 15 years and adequate stool
specimen collection from 80 percent of AFP cases, in which 2 specimens
are collected 24 hours apart, both within 14 days of paralysis onset,
shipped on ice or frozen ice packs, and arriving in good condition
(without leakage or desiccation) at a WHO-accredited laboratory.
National data might mask surveillance system weaknesses at subnational
levels. The GPEI strategic plan operational target in countries with
current or recent WPV transmission is NPAFP 2, both nationally and in
each province/state. Data reported are for AFP cases with onset during
December 2009--November 2010.

*** Mass campaigns conducted for a brief period (days to weeks),
during which one dose of OPV is administered to all children aged
under 5 years, regardless of vaccination history.

**** Countries with no evidence of indigenous WPV transmission for
over 12 months and subsequent cases determined to be of external
origin by genomic sequencing analysis.

***** Surveys to corroborate reported administrative infant coverage
have not been conducted recently in Angola and DRC, and reported
administrative data might not be accurate.

****** At least 12 months must pass without confirmed WPV cases and
with AFP indicators meeting performance targets before WPV
transmission can be considered provisionally interrupted.

******* Current progress is reported at
<http://www.polioeradication.org>.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[According to the Polio Eradication Website report from 16 Mar 2011,
results of genetic sequencing of a WPV 1 isolate from the south-east
of Angola on 7 Jan 2011 was confirmed to be a continuation of the
re-established WPV1 circulation. (see
<http://www.polioeradication.org/>. There is also mention that in
Chad, there is a case of polio due to WPV3 with onset on 30 Jan 2011
that is under investigation as representing possible continued
transmission of re-established WPV circulation. And in DR Congo,
transmission of its re-established WPV1 is known to have continued
through at least December 2010. (see
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Dataandmonitoring/Poliothisweek.aspx>).

There were 2 new WPV1 cases reported in DR Congo in the weekly report
on 16 Mar 2011, one from 2010, and one from 2011, bringing the total
number of cases in 2011 to 21, and to 101 for 2010. The most recent
case had onset of paralysis on 15 Feb 2011, in Biyela, Kinshasa.

As of 16 Mar 2011:
(<http://www.polioeradication.org/Dataandmonitoring/Poliothisweek.aspx>)
Total Cases: Year to date 2011 / Year to date 2010 / Total in 2010
Globally: 55 / 47 / 1294
In endemic countries: 18 / 29 / 232
In non-endemic countries: 37 / 8 / 1062

The above statistics suggest that while significant progress has been
made in the 4 endemic countries, with a greater than 50 percent
reduction in confirmed cases than in the same time frame as in 2010,
there has been a greater than 4-fold increase in confirmed cases in
non-endemic countries in this same time frame when compared with 2010.
Of note, in 2010, there were 232 confirmed cases in endemic countries,
while there were 1062 confirmed cases in non-endemic countries, an
almost 5-fold difference in absolute cases. These figures suggest that
while there are 4 countries where WPV transmission has never been
interrupted, those countries that had interrupted transmission have
been challenged in maintaining high enough levels of coverage with
polio vaccine to prevent re-introduction of WPV and subsequent
significant transmission of the re-introduced WPV.

For the map of polio cases confirmed in 2011, see
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Dataandmonitoring.aspx>. - Mod.MPP]
See Also
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (02): Congo DR, Angola, Pakistan
20110227.0650
Poliomyelitis - worldwide: India (WB) 20110218.0532
2010
----
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (31): DR Congo 20101225.4549
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (30): DR Congo, RFI 20101209.4395
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (28): Rep of Congo, Asia, Russia
20101126.4272
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (27): Rep of Congo, WHO 20101110.4074
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (26): Rep of Congo 20101104.3996
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (25): importation related 20101104.3994
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (24): Africa, WHO-AFRO 20101103.3978
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (22): Pakistan 20101022.3820
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (21): India 20101008.3650
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (20): Afghanistan, Angola 20101007.3639
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (19): Congo DR 20101001.3564
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (18): Angola, Congo DR 20100908.3237
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (17): Angola, RFI 20100803.2616
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (14): Angola, alert 20100719.2426
Poliomyelitis - worldwide (08): Nigeria (SO) 20100513.1559
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide 20100125.0280
2009
----
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (04): Importations Africa 20090417.1454
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (03): Sudan, Angola 20090305.0900
Poliomyelitis - Worldwide (02): Kenya, Uganda ex Sudan 20090226.0808
.................................................sb/mpp/msp/lm
*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at:
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Donations.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to
an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name
name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub-
scribe at <http://www.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.lasso>.
For assistance from a human being, send mail to:
<postmaster@promedmail.org>.
############################################################
############################################################
</body>
