<header id=018303>
Published Date: 2009-12-23 10:00:02 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hantavirus update 2009 - Americas (12): USA, pediatric
Archive Number: 20091223.4323
</header>
<body id=018303>
HANTAVIRUS UPDATE 2009 - AMERICAS (12): USA, PEDIATRIC
*******************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Wed 23 Dec 2009
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2009 58(50); 1409-12 [edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5850a3.htm?s_cid=mm5850a3_e>


Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in 5 pediatric patients - 4 states, 2009
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a reportable infectious
disease with a high case-fatality rate, transmitted to humans by
exposure to rodents. Each year, 20-40 cases of HPS occur in the
United States; cases in persons aged less than 17 years make up fewer
than 7 percent of those cases, and cases in children aged less than
10 years are exceptionally rare. CDC received reports of 5 pediatric
cases of HPS occurring during 16 May- 25 Nov 2009, among children
aged 6-14 years from Arizona, California, Colorado, and Washington. 3
of the children were aged less than 10 years, and all 5 had exposure
to rodents. This report summarizes the 5 cases, including the
clinical findings and likely means of transmission of a hantavirus.
Thrombocytopenia, elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, and
pulmonary infiltrates were observed in all 5 children; elevated
hematocrit was observed in 3. One child died, and 3 of the 4 children
who recovered required mechanical ventilation during hospitalization.
Clinicians should consider HPS in the differential diagnosis for
children with unexplained acute respiratory distress, especially if
recent rodent exposure is noted. Public health agencies should
promote preventive measures, including rodent control in housing and
play areas, and children should be advised to avoid contact with
rodents and areas of infestation.

Case 1
------
On 16 May [2009], a boy aged 6 years who lived in Colorado went to a
Texas hospital with a 2-day history of diarrhea and shortness of
breath. On initial examination, the child had cyanotic lips and nail
beds, with cold extremities. His pulse was 163, and his temperature
was 101 deg F (38.3 deg C). Soon after arrival at the hospital, the
child became apneic and had no palpable pulse. Chest compressions
were initiated, and the child was intubated and ventilated. A chest
radiograph revealed bilateral infiltrates, and blood analysis
demonstrated elevated hematocrit, elevated WBC count, and
thrombocytopenia (Table). Within 2 hours of admission to the
hospital, the boy died from apparent cardiac failure secondary to
shock. The child had been treated with intravenous fluids,
ceftriaxone, epinephrine, atropine, and albuterol. The working
diagnosis at the time of the child's death was shock and sepsis
caused by pneumonia.

An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) performed by the
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment revealed Sin
Nombre hantavirus-specific serum immunoglobulin M (IgM). An
environmental assessment conducted at the boy's home in Colorado
found rodent droppings and nesting materials under his bed and in
bushes in front of the home where the boy had played.

Case 2
------
On 7 Jun [2009], an adolescent boy aged 14 years went to a Washington
emergency department with a 5-day history of shortness of breath,
chest pain, cough, and fever. Upon admission, the child had a fever
of 103 deg F (39.4 deg C), pulse of 100, and a respiratory rate
varying between 40 and 60. He was thrombocytopenic and had elevated
WBC with atypical lymphocytosis (Table). A chest radiograph revealed
bilateral interstitial infiltrates. No details were provided
regarding treatment or any suspicion of HPS.

Because of worsening respiratory distress and hypoxia, the patient
was intubated and mechanically ventilated for approximately 24 hours.
He improved and was discharged home on 13 Jun [2009]. An ELISA of
serum detected Sin Nombre hantavirus-specific IgM at the Washington
State Public Health Laboratories. A follow-up environmental
assessment found rodent fecal contamination in a container of corn
that the youth reported hand-grinding 8 days before illness onset.

Case 3
------
On 12 Jul [2009], a boy aged 6 years went to a Colorado emergency
department with a 5-day history of fever (maximum 103 deg F [39.4 deg
C]), erythematous facial rash, and myalgia. Upon admission the boy's
pulse was 120, respiratory rate 48, and oxygen saturation 72 percent
on room air. Dyspnea was apparent with coarse breath sounds, wheezes,
and crackles on auscultation. His WBC count was elevated, and
thrombocytopenia was noted (Table). A chest radiograph revealed
bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrates with pleural effusions. HPS
was suspected, and the boy was treated with intravenous fluids,
ceftriaxone, and azithromycin.

The boy was intubated and mechanically ventilated from 12 Jul-20 Jul
[2009]; he was discharged on 22 Jul 2009. Serum ELISA performed by
the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment revealed
positive Sin Nombre hantavirus IgM. Family members reported that
approximately 10 days before hospitalization the child was bitten on
the finger by a mouse. During environmental assessment, evidence of
rodent infestation was observed in outbuildings and abandoned
vehicles but not within the house.

Case 4
------
On 12 Jul [2009], a girl aged 9 years living in Arizona went to a New
Mexico hospital with chest pain and shortness of breath. Symptoms
began with abdominal discomfort on 6 Jul [2009], which was followed
by headache, vomiting, and myalgia. Upon examination, the girl's
temperature was 99.9 deg F (37.7 deg C), and her pulse was 162.
Laboratory findings included thrombocytopenia, elevated hematocrit,
and elevated WBC count (Table). A chest radiograph revealed diffuse
interstitial infiltrates. During transport to a tertiary care
facility for further treatment, the child's temperature reached 103.8
deg F (39.9 deg C). HPS was suspected, and the girl was treated with
intravenous fluids, ceftriaxone, and vancomycin.

Because of worsening signs of pulmonary distress, the girl was
intubated and received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy
for 4 days. She remained on a ventilator until 22 Jul [2009] and was
hospitalized until 5 Aug [2009]. Serum tested with a commercial
immunoblot assay revealed Sin Nombre hantavirus immunoglobulin G
(IgG). Evidence of rodents was found at 3 residences frequented by
the girl in Arizona: the family home, grandparents' home, and a
summer home where she played in an underground dugout that had rodent burrows.

Case 5
------
On 25 Nov [2009], an adolescent boy aged 13 years went to a
California emergency department with a 5-day history of fever
(maximum 102.6 deg F [39.2 deg C]), cough, posttussive vomiting,
diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed a tender
chest, with crackles and diminished breath sounds in the lower lobes
of the lungs, and a respiratory rate of 30. Laboratory findings
included elevated WBC, elevated hematocrit, and thrombocytopenia
(Table). Chest radiographs revealed diffuse interstitial opacities
with pleural effusion. Treatment included intravenous fluids,
ceftriaxone, clindamycin, and azithromycin. The patient received
supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula and was discharged home on 3 Dec [2009].

Testing for hantavirus was requested on day 4 of hospitalization.
Serum was submitted to a commercial diagnostic laboratory, and Sin
Nombre hantavirus IgM and IgG antibodies were detected by immunoblot
assay. Extensive remodeling was under way in the youth's home at the
time of illness, including removal and replacement of floors and
walls. 3 mice were trapped in the youth's kitchen and garage
approximately 3 months before disease onset, but the patient had no
known direct or indirect contact with the rodents.

[Reported by: C Levy, MS, Arizona Dept of Health Svcs. K Gains, MS,
Southeast Land and Environment, Prowers County; V Crocco, Chaffee
County Environmental Health Dept; J Brown, MSN, Prowers County
Nursing Svc; E Lawaczeck, DVM, W Ray, M Miller, MS, M Klaber, MS, A
Doussette, MS, Colorado Dept of Public Health and Environment. C
Ralston, Benton-Franklin Health District; N Marsden-Haug, MPH,
Washington State Dept of Health. C Fritz, DVM, California Dept of
Public Health. C Watson, MSN, Nevada County Public Health Dept. A
MacNeil, PhD, J Mills, PhD, PE Rollin, MD, S Nichol, PhD, Special
Pathogens Bur, Div of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center
for Zoonotic Vector-Borne, and Enteric Diseases; B Knust, DVM, EIS
Officer, CDC.]

MMWR Editorial note
--------------
HPS was first described in 1993 and has been a nationally notifiable
disease* since 1995. As of 18 Dec 2009, a total of 537 cases of HPS
had been reported to CDC, with a case-fatality rate of 36 percent. Of
all confirmed cases, fewer than 7 percent have occurred in children
aged less than 17 years, and only 4 cases have occurred in children
aged less than 10 years, including the 2 children aged 6 years and
one child aged 9 years described in this report (the 4th case was in
a child aged 8 years). Although reports of HPS in persons aged less
than 17 years are uncommon, the clinical illnesses of the pediatric
patients in this report were similar to those observed in adults. HPS
typically has a 2-10 day prodrome with nonspecific viral symptoms,
and the acute respiratory phase often commences abruptly (2). In all
5 cases summarized in this report, the children had illnesses for 2-6
days preceding onset of acute respiratory symptoms. Thrombocytopenia
and elevated WBC count were observed in all 5 cases, and 3 children
had elevated hematocrit; these hematologic signs are comparable to
those typical of HPS in adult patients (3,4). A previous review of 12
pediatric HPS cases in New Mexico found thrombocytopenia in 100
percent and elevated WBC count and hemoconcentration in 27 percent of
cases (5).

Children infected with [a] hantavirus can develop severe illness,
similar to adults. Antivirals have not been shown to be effective in
the treatment of HPS (6); therefore, medical interventions consist
primarily of supportive care. Respiratory distress requiring
mechanical ventilation was observed in 4 of the cases described in
this report, similar to trends observed nationally (4). In case 1,
the child died from apparent cardiac failure secondary to shock.
Although cardiac functioning tests could not be obtained, abnormally
low cardiac index and stroke volume with increased vascular
resistance has been reported previously in HPS cases and is
considered to be an important cause of death in persons with HPS (7).
In case 4, the patient received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
therapy, which might be of benefit to HPS patients who require both
oxygenation and circulatory support (8).

Hantaviruses are transmitted from rodent hosts to humans through
inhalation of infectious aerosols of rodent excreta or direct
inoculation into broken skin. In North America, Sin Nombre virus is
the most common cause of HPS, and its reservoir is the deer mouse
(_Peromyscus maniculatus_). The largest number of HPS illnesses has
occurred in the southwestern United States, although cases have been
reported in 31 states. Several rodent species distributed throughout
the United States have been identified as reservoirs for
hantaviruses, many of which have been associated with HPS. All the
patients in this report had evidence of rodents in and around their
homes, including places where the patients in cases 1 and 4 played.
The patient in case 2 likely was exposed by hand-grinding
contaminated corn; the patient in case 5 might have been exposed to
rodent-contaminated areas or a virus-containing aerosol during
remodeling of his home. The likely means of hantavirus transmission
to the patient in case 3 was a mouse bite, reported previously in 2
pediatric cases (9). No evidence exists of person-to-person
hantavirus transmission in the United States.

Current CDC recommendations to reduce the risk for hantavirus
infection include trapping and excluding rodents and using personal
protective equipment when handling potentially infected rodents or
disturbing areas of rodent infestation. Recommended cleaning agents
include household disinfectant or bleach solution (10). Rodent
control activities should include outbuildings and places where
children play. Educational efforts aimed at parents and children,
including how to recognize the signs of rodent infestation and take
proper precautions, are recommended. Although the reasons for the
infrequent occurrence of HPS in children remain unknown, the cases in
this report serve as a reminder that children are susceptible to
hantavirus infection. More information is available from CDC at
<http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hanta/hps/index.htm>.

References
----------
1. Nationally notifiable conditions. Annual lists of infectious
conditions. Available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/ncphi/disss/nndss/phs/infdis.htm>. Accessed 21 Dec 2009.
2. Mertz GJ, Hjelle B, Crowley M, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of
new world hantavirus infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2006; 19(5):
437-42 [available at
<http://www.usherbrooke.ca/microbiologie-infectiologie/fileadmin/sites/microbiologie-infectiologie/documents/Cours-residents/16-09-2009/APP4.pdf>.
3. Koster F, Foucar K, Hjelle B, et al: Rapid presumptive diagnosis
of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome by peripheral blood smear
review. Am J Clin Pathol 2001; 116(5): 665-72 [available at
<http://ajcp.ascpjournals.org/content/116/5/665.long>.
4. Khan AS, Khabbaz RF, Armstrong LR, et al: Hantavirus pulmonary
syndrome: the first 100 US cases. J Infect Dis 1996; 173(6): 1297-303
[abstract available at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8648200>].
5. Ramos MM, Overturf GD, Crowley MR, et al: Infection with Sin
Nombre hantavirus: clinical presentation and outcome in children and
adolescents. Pediatrics 2001; 108(2):e27 [available at
<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/cgi/content/full/108/2/e27>].
6. Mertz GJ, Miedzinski L, Goade D: Placebo-controlled, double-blind
trial of intravenous ribavirin for the treatment of hantavirus
cardiopulmonary syndrome in North America. Clin Infect Dis 2004;
399): 1307-13 [available at
<http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/425007>].
7. Hallin GW, Simpson SQ, Crowell RE, et al: Cardiopulmonary
manifestations of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Crit Care Med 1996;
24(2): 252-8 [abstract available at
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8605797>].
8. Dietl CA, Wernle JA, Pett SB, et al: Extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation support improves survival of patients with severe
hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2008;
135(3): 579-84 [abstract available at
<http://jtcs.ctsnetjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/135/3/579>].
9. St Jeor S: Three-week incubation period for hantavirus infection.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004; 23(10): 974-5 [abstract available at
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15602208>].
10. CDC. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome - United States: updated
recommendations for risk reduction. MMWR 2002; 51(No. RR-9)
[available at <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5109a1.htm>].

* A clinical case of HPS is defined by CDC as illness in a previously
healthy person with acute febrile respiratory illness and
thrombocytopenia, characterized by bilateral diffuse interstitial
edema that can radiographically resemble acute respiratory distress
syndrome, with respiratory compromise requiring supplemental oxygen,
and/or an autopsy examination demonstrating noncardiogenic pulmonary
edema without an identifiable cause. A confirmed case requires
detection of hantavirus-specific IgM or IgG, a positive reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction result in clinical specimens,
or detection of antigen by immunohistochemistry (1).

What is already known on this topic?
------------------------------------
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is an uncommon but severe disease
that can occur after contact with an infected rodent or rodent-infested area.

What is added by this report?
----------------------------
Although reports of HPS are uncommon in children, the 5 pediatric
cases in this report affirm that children can experience severe
morbidity and a clinical course similar to that of adults.

What are the implications for public health practice?
-----------------------------------------------------
HPS should be considered in children with unexplained acute
respiratory distress, especially if rodent exposure is noted;
preventive measures include rodent control in housing and play areas
and instructing children to avoid contact with rodents or areas of infestation.

Table: cases of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, by selected patient
and clinical characteristics - 4 states, 2009

Characteristic: Case 1 / Case 2 / Case 3 / Case 4 / Case 5
----------------------------------------------------------
State of residence: Colorado / Washington / Colorado / Arizona / California
Patient age (yrs): 6 / 14 / 6 / 9 / 13
Days from illness onset to hospitalization: 2 / 5 / 5 / 6 / 5
Days in hospital: 1 / 6 / 11 / 25 / 8
Maximum white blood cell count (x 10 to the 9/L) (reference range:
4-11 x 10 to the 9/L): 57 / 25 / 15 / 38 / 27
Maximum hematocrit (percent) (reference range*: males, 36 percent-47
percent; females, 35 percent-45 percent): 55 / 39 / 33 / 52 / 63
Minimum platelets (x 10 to the 9/L) (reference range: 150-400 x 10 to
the 9/L): 40 / 19 / 56 / 24 / 39
Chest radiograph with infiltrates: Yes / Yes / Yes / Yes / Yes
Outcome: Died / Fully recovered / Fully recovered / Fully recovered /
Fully recovered

* For persons aged 10-18 years.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

Maps showing the location of the states in the western USA, can be
accessed at <http://www.sioux.com/images/US_MAP.gif>
and the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at <http://healthmap.org/r/00Ij>.
A photograph of a deer mouse (_Peromyscus maniculatus_) is available at
<http://www.discoverlife.org/IM/I_RB/0000/320/Peromyscus_maniculatus,I_RB26.jpg>.
- Mod.TY]
See Also
Hantavirus update 2009 - Americas (11): USA (CA) 20091214.4245
Hantavirus update 2009 - Americas (10): USA (NM) 20090918.3281
Hantavirus update 2009 - Americas (08): USA (NM, AZ) 20090708.2452
Hantavirus update 2009 - Americas (06): USA (NM) 20090511.1753
2008
----
Hantavirus update 2008 - Americas (22): USA (NM), Chile ex Arg.: susp
20081206.3836
Hantavirus update 2008 - Americas (04): USA (NM) 20080308.0957
2007
----
Hantavirus update 2007 - Americas (14): USA (NM) 20071201.3871
Hantavirus update 2007 - Americas (07): USA (NM) 20070621.2007
Hantavirus update 2007 - Americas (06): USA (NM) 20070531.1756
...................................mpp/ty/mj/mpp

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
