<header id=021258>
Published Date: 2011-12-23 11:49:23 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> Hepatitis C - USA (04): (KY, MA) transplant related
Archive Number: 20111223.3664
</header>
<body id=021258>
HEPATITIS C - USA (04): (KENTUCKY, MASSACHUSETTS) TRANSPLANT RELATED
********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Fri 23 Dec 2011
Source: WCVB-TV, TheBostonChannel.com [edited]
http://www.thebostonchannel.com/health/30058634/detail.html


A child at Boston Children's Hospital was infected with hepatitis C
[virus] after a blood vessel transplant. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention released a 29-page report on the investigation
Thu 22 Dec 2011 (see [2] below).

In September [2011], doctors unknowingly transplanted the diseased
tissue from an infected donor. It was a situation the CDC calls
totally preventable. A mistake by a worker at a lab incorrectly read
the test tissue as negative for the hepatitis. The mistake was caught
after 2 other transplant recipients in Kentucky contracted the
illness, but not before the child at Children's received the infected
tissue.

"The patient received counseling and a care plan that includes an
evaluation every 3 months," Children's [Hospital] said in a statement.
"Children's will continue to focus on providing care to our patient
affected by this unfortunate situation," the hospital said in a
statement."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Fri 23 Dec 2011
Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011; 60(50): 1697-1700 [summ.,
edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6050a1.htm?s_cid=mm6050a1_e


Transmission of hepatitis C virus through transplanted organs and
tissue - Kentucky and Massachusetts, 2011
----------------------------------------------------------------------
On 29 Sep 2011, the United Network for Organ Sharing notified CDC of 2
patients who tested positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection
approximately 6 months after receiving kidney transplants from a
deceased donor. Before transplantation, the donor had tested negative
for HCV antibody by the organ procurement organization. Tissue also
was procured from the donor for possible transplantation. The tissue
bank performed an HCV antibody test on the donor's serum specimen that
was negative and nucleic acid testing (NAT) that was positive, but
misread as negative. Retesting of the donor specimen during the
investigation confirmed the NAT results as positive. Donated tissue
included 43 musculoskeletal grafts and one cardiopulmonary patch,
which were distributed to health-care facilities in several states. An
investigation was initiated to 1) identify potential sources of the
donor's infection, 2) document the mode of transmission to the organ
recipients, and 3) ensure timely notification of the implanting
surgeons and testing of tissue recipients. Implantation of infected
HCV tissue occurred after recognition of new HCV infection in the
organ transplant recipients, highlighting the need for rapid
communication between transplant centers, organ procurement
organizations, tissue banks, and public health authorities regarding
suspected transplantation transmission events.

Donor investigation
-------------------
The donor, a middle-aged man in Kentucky, sustained a traumatic brain
injury in March 2011 in an all-terrain vehicular incident and died 2
days later. His medical history was significant for schizophrenia,
substance abuse, and a 5-month incarceration approximately 10 years
before his death. The donor had no known history of intravenous drug
use or other hepatitis risk factors, according to his father at the
time of organ procurement; however, further investigation revealed
that the donor's father had limited contact with his son during the
year before his death and was unfamiliar with recent personal habits
or behaviors.

Policies of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN),
the oversight entity for solid organs in the United States, require
testing for HCV by antibody only, whereas the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), which regulates human cells, tissues, and
cellular and tissue-based products, requires screening of donated
tissue for HCV by both antibody and NAT (1). The donor's HCV antibody
tested negative on both organ and tissue donor screening, but
misreading of the reaction wells on testing led to an incorrectly
reported negative HCV NAT result. Once this error was identified,
repeat NAT was performed at the tissue bank and confirmed that the
donor was HCV-positive at the time of donation. During the donor's
final hospital stay in March [2011], he received 6 units of blood
products. Pretransfusion serum from the donor was not available for
analysis. Testing of posttransfusion stored serum at CDC on 28 Oct
2011 confirmed by NAT that the donor was HCV-positive with genotype 1a
and a viral load of more than 69 000 000 IU/mL. Blood traceback
investigation of the 6 associated blood donors to the infected donor
is ongoing, and all remaining units from these donations have been
quarantined.

[The section dealing with 'Organ Transplant Investigation' and donor
and recipient details are omitted. For information refer to the
original document at the source URL above. - Mod.CP]

Tissue transplant investigation
-------------------------------
On 29 Sep 2011, the organ procurement organization notified the tissue
bank of the apparent HCV transmission to the kidney and liver
recipients. The tissue bank informed health-care facilities, and a
voluntary recall was begun on 30 Sep 2011. The tissue bank had
distributed 43 musculoskeletal grafts and one cardiopulmonary patch to
health-care facilities, but names and contact information for surgeons
who implanted these tissues were not uniformly available at the time
of recall. CDC telephone notification of all surgeons and requests for
testing of all patients was completed on 27 Oct 2011.

The cardiopulmonary patch, the only nonmusculoskeletal tissue
distributed, had been treated with antibiotics by the tissue bank
according to protocol and was implanted by a health-care facility in
Massachusetts on 26 Sep 2011. After the health-care facility was
notified, the recipient underwent testing. Hepatitis C antibody was
negative, but NAT was positive at 82 000 IU/mL; the recipient's ALT
[alanine aminotransaminase] was normal (12 U/L).

The 43 distributed musculoskeletal grafts were treated chemically and
by irradiation at the tissue bank, according to protocol. 15 of the
musculoskeletal tissues were implanted; the remaining 28 were returned
to the tissue bank. The 15 recipients of musculoskeletal tissues were
recommended to receive HCV serologic testing and NAT immediately and
again 6 months from the time of tissue implantation. As of 16 Dec
2011, initial test results from 14 of the musculoskeletal tissue
recipients were known, and all were negative based on HCV NAT.

Molecular characterization of HCV strains
-----------------------------------------
To determine the genetic relatedness among the HCV strains obtained
from the donor, the 2 kidney recipients, the liver recipient, and the
cardiopulmonary patch recipient, maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees
were created (2). These analyses showed that 2 specimens from the
donor and the 3 specimens from the kidney recipients and
cardiopulmonary patch recipient shared identical NS5b sequences; the
liver recipient did not share these sequences, indicating previous
infection. Quasispecies analysis was performed on the specimens that
shared identical NS5b sequences (3). The E1-HVR1 quasispecies
sequences from the donor, the 2 kidney recipients, and the
cardiopulmonary patch recipient clustered in a single group,
indicating their close genetic relatedness consistent with a common
source of HCV transmission. The donor and the 2 kidney recipients and
one cardiopulmonary patch recipient had from 2 to 10 distinct E1-HVR1
sequences that shared from 99.7 percent to 100 percent similarity with
each other.

MMWR editorial note
-------------------
The transmission of HCV associated with transplanted organs and
minimally processed tissue has been described previously, but this is
the 1st recognized HCV transmission via a cardiopulmonary patch (4).
Although correct reading of tissue donor NAT screening results would
have prevented transmission through the tissue patch, the organ
recipients still would have become infected because current OPTN
policies for organ donor screening only require HCV serologic testing
(1). Furthermore, positive organ donor NAT screening likely would have
resulted in quarantine of potentially infected tissue. Use of NAT, in
addition to anti-HCV serologic testing, has been proposed to decrease
the risk for transmitting undetected HCV infection. However, no one
test can uniformly detect all infections, either because of
false-negative tests resulting from the window period, or
assay-related issues, or, as described in this report, because of
human error.

Without information regarding a donor's behavioral risk factors, the
assay selection and sensitivity of pretransplantation testing is
critical. The incidence of HCV infection not detected by serologic
screening for anti-HCV antibody varies from 1 in 5000 for normal-risk
patients to 1 in 1000 for patients at high risk (5). The window period
(that is, the time from exposure to detectable HCV antibody) has a
mean of 65-70 days; this period is shortened to 3-5 days with use of
NAT (6). A transplant facility's decision to use an organ is based on
the organ procurement organization's assessment of the donor's risk
status and on test results (5). Multiple factors, including the urgent
need for a potentially life-saving transplant and informed consent of
the transplant candidate must be considered when determining whether
benefits of transplantation outweigh the risk for transmitting HCV.
The US Public Health Service recently drafted guidelines recommending
testing of all organ donors with NAT for HCV regardless of risk status
(7). Even if test results are not available at the time of
transplantation, results still can be used afterward to guide
recipient evaluation and treatment.

The diagnosis of HCV infection in 2 recipients of kidneys from the
same donor should raise immediate suspicion of donor-derived infection
and reporting to OPTN and to local and state health departments as
required by policy. Reporting to local and state health departments
also should occur because acute HCV infection is a nationally
notifiable disease. Reporting of suspected new diagnoses in organ
recipients, including to tissue banks, should occur without delay,
because such diagnoses might have implications for tissues that have
not yet been transplanted.

The events in this report demonstrate the importance of timely
communication once a transplant transmission is suspected and the
difficulty of tracking tissue to the patient or provider level should
a potential transmission be recognized after tissue has been
distributed. Although FDA requires that the tissue bank track the
distribution of tissues down to the institutional level, no government
regulations require tracking tissue to the patient level; hospitals
are asked voluntarily to return a record, often a postcard, to the
tissue bank to notify them of implantation of the tissue. Many
health-care facilities have a mechanism to track tissue to the
patient, although approaches are not standardized (8). Systems that
facilitate real-time notification of possible disease transmission to
tissue banks, organ procurement organizations, and other transplant
centers do not exist, and development is hindered by the lack of
standardized tissue nomenclature and identification standards (9,10).

This investigation reveals several areas in which current detection
and notification might be improved to prevent similar future
transplant transmission events, including: 1) consideration of the use
of HCV NAT for organ donors; 2) use of algorithms or other procedures
to ensure accurate reading of test results and reduce human error; and
3) timely feedback of possible disease transmission in organ or tissue
recipients to organ procurement organizations, tissue banks, public
health authorities, and regulators.

[For references readers should consult the original document at the
source URL above. - Mod.CP]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[A donor transmitted HCV to 2 kidney recipients and one tissue
recipient because of a negative antibody test and an incorrectly read
HCV nucleic testing result. Implantation of infected tissue occurred
after recognition of the infected organ transplant recipients,
highlighting the need for more rapid methods to recognize and
communicate information on suspected transplantation transmission. HCV
antibody testing alone might not be adequate to detect disease in
organ donors with acute infection or in recipients who are
immunosuppressed. A real-time system for notification of disease
clusters in transplant recipients is needed to prevent further use of
tissue that tests positive for HCV or other infections. - Mod.CP

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:
http://healthmap.org/r/1zJq]
See Also
Hepatitis C - USA (02): (FL) transplant related 20100926.3482
Hepatitis C - USA: (FL) transplant related, RFI 20100825.2995
.................................................cp/mj/lm
</body>
