<header id=063258>
Published Date: 2008-02-07 08:00:15 EST
Subject: PRO/AH> Progr infl neuropathy, pork plant workers - USA (04): (IN, MN)
Archive Number: 20080207.0500
</header>
<body id=063258>
PROGRESSIVE INFLAMMATORY NEUROPATHY, PORK PLANT WORKERS - USA (04):
(INDIANA, MINNESOTA)
***************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Tue 5 Feb 2007
Source: The Washington Post [edited]
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/discussion/2008/02/03/DI2008020301626.html>


Washington Post staff writer, David Brown, and Michael T Osterholm,
director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at
the University of Minnesota, were online Tue 5 Feb 2008 to discuss a
new illness that has surfaced among workers at a pork factory. A
transcript follows.

David Brown: We have a pretty interesting subject today [5 Feb 2008],
the appearance of what seems to be a new disease of the nervous
system that has been found in a dozen slaughterhouse workers in
Minnesota. We are very lucky to have with us a distinguished
epidemiologist, public health authority, and scientific investigator,
Michael T Osterholm. He is the former [Minnesota state
epidemiologist] who has been involved in many interesting
investigations in the past. He is now director of the Center for
Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of
Minnesota. He is an expert on pandemic planning and has been an
advisor to the federal government on that issue. So let's begin.

Cincinnati, Ohio: Can we see any similarities between the lesions
found in the brain of slaughterhouse workers and other human diseases
such as multiple sclerosis?

David Brown: The neurologist at the Mayo Clinic with whom I spoke
said that the MRI [magnetic imaging resonance] of the patients show
nerve-root thickening suggestive of inflammation. They have not seen
abnormalities of the white matter in the brain, which I believe is
characteristic of multiple sclerosis. There have been no brain
biopsies of the slaughterhouse workers. At least one has had a nerve
in the foot biopsied and it shows mild inflammation but is apparently
not terribly abnormal. In general, this condition appears to be a
disease of the peripheral nervous system, in other words the nerves
outside the brain and spinal cord.

Washington, DC: 1) Are there any similarities of the patients (other
than they are Spanish-speaking immigrants) such as their previous
jobs or home communities? 2) Do any of the pigs come from herds with
commonalities (we assume the pigs are American and not from some
other country such as Canada)? 3) Why the Minnesota and other pig
processing plant in Indiana and not elsewhere (and how much
investigation is going forward among other plants/employees)? 4) Are
there any reports from Chinese and Korean epidemiologists about
workers handling the brain matter (or consumers eating it)? 5) What
are the Minnesota and Indiana Agriculture Health folks doing with these data?

Michael T Osterholm: A very detailed and well-conducted case-control
study of ill and non-ill workers was conducted by the Minnesota
Department of Health. There were [no] occupational, social, ethnic,
demographic, or economic factors associated with illness status other
than working at the head table (that is, where the brain extraction
occurs) or performing other procedures at that work area.

More than 90 percent of the pigs come from an area of approximately
100 miles (161 km) of Austin, Minnesota. There is no evidence of any
relationship between specific hogs processed and human illness. And
there are no reports of any illness in the pigs processed over the
past several years that can be related to this illness or even ones
possibly associated with any foodborne disease. This is why there is
no concern about the safety of the pork leaving this plant.

The final answer on why not elsewhere except the QPP and Indiana
plants is still under investigation. However, its investigators to
date have only identified 3 plants in the US that used high-pressure
air for brain extraction. These include the QPP and Indiana plants.
There is an active effort to identify other plants around the world
that may have used this procedure.

David Brown: QPP is Quality Pork Processors, the company that owns
the slaughterhouse and processing plant where the ill workers are employed.

Washington, DC: Are there any similarities with this and mad cow disease?

David Brown: Mad cow disease is caused by a prion, which is an
infectious protein, a very mysterious entity. Prion diseases are
characterized by slow onset and a relentless downhill course. There
is no evidence of prions or any other infectious agents (such as
bacteria, viruses, parasites) in the people [with] this new
condition. Plus it comes on more quickly than mad cow disease, which
takes years to appear. This condition also gets better to some extent
when people are removed from their usual jobs in the plant,
suggesting that some exposure there brings it on or exacerbates it.
This also is unlike an infection, and particularly unlike mad cow disease.

Washington, DC: I wanted to know were there any investigations
carried out at Korea and China where the meat was exported? Did
people consuming it suffer any illness?

Michael T Osterholm: The consumption of pig brains is a very common
and longstanding practice in many areas of the world, including Asia
and South America. There is no evidence that consuming pig brains is
at all associated with this outbreak. If in fact it is caused by an
immune reaction of the human to exposure to very small particles of
the aerosolized pig brain, the inhalation route is the only important
route of exposure. The typical food handling practices that occur in
the home or restaurants would not be a source for aerosolizing the
brain material and thus not a risk factor. This is not a foodborne
disease and thus we should not confuse food consumption with this situation.

Arlington, Virginia: How serious is this new disease to the general
population? Since it seems specific to the workers, can it be controlled?

David Brown: As both The Post's story and the one today [5 Feb 2008]
in The New York Times make a point of saying, there is no threat to
the general population from this "outbreak." There is no evidence it
is a transmissible (that is, contagious or infectious) disease.
(Since it seems to arise from inhalation of pig brain material,
people might want to keep away from school science projects and home
activities that aerosolize brain matter, but that shouldn't be hard
to do!) The 3 slaughterhouses that use compressed air to "harvest"
pig brains have stopped doing that, which appears to have prevented
any more cases. Only the plant in Minnesota has confirmed cases; the
few cases in Indiana are suspected only at this point.

Alexandria, Virginia: Since we're at what appears to be an early
stage of discovering this disease, are researchers learning anything
from this situation that may help prevent future outbreaks? or help
existing disorders or conditions that may have similarities to what
these workers are experiencing?

David Brown: There are dozens of tests and studies underway or being
planned. It seems likely that some interesting immunology will come
out of this weird story. In particular, scientists want to find out
what material in the pig brain is stimulating the immune system,
which aspects of immunity are involved (antibodies certainly, but
perhaps more), and what part of human nerves are being attacked by
the immune response. There's a lot more to the story that will come
out in months, and probably years, ahead.

Alexandria, Virginia: Were the affected workers wearing masks of any
type? If not, would a basic mask prevent the inhalation of this
"aerosolized brain matter"?

Michael T Osterholm: The workers were not wearing masks at the time
of exposure as this type of process has never been considered an
inhalational risk situation by public health officials, occupational
risk experts, or the pork industry. Now of course the procedure of
using high-pressure air to remove brains is no longer used in the QPP
plant. In fact, brains are not being harvested at all at the plant.

Alexandria, Virginia: Are you satisfied with the speed by which this
illness surfaced onto the public health radar? What lesson should we
take from this so as to improve our awareness of emerging diseases?

Michael T Osterholm: I believe this situation was detected as quickly
as could be hoped for given the rarity of the illness and the
atypical illness presentation. The QPP nursing staff first noted the
commonality between 3 ill workers late last summer [2007] and
encouraged them to seek medical care. Shortly there after the local
medical clinic (a Mayo Clinic facility) noted a similar pattern of
illnesses through an interpreter who worked with the same patients.
As more cases were detected shortly thereafter, the Minnesota
Department of Health was alerted and an investigation began.

Washington DC: I understand that the etiology of this disease is
still uncertain, but is there any alternative explanation to the
symptoms? What I mean to ask is if there is any infectious agent that
is present within the slaughtered pigs that may cause these novel neuropathies?

Michael T Osterholm: An exhaustive study has been done looking for
infectious agents in the patients and there is no evidence that this
condition is directly related to an infection or a post-infectious
disease immune response. In addition, the epidemiology of the case
illnesses does not at all fit with an infectious disease spread. The
only cases in the QPP plant are associated with exposure at the head
bench area. If this was an infectious disease in the pigs we would
expect to see employee cases in other areas of the plant not related
to the brain extraction process or other exposures not related to
inhalation. Finally, there is no disease in pigs identified that is
similar to the human disease seen in the workers. And the pig herd
health is confirmed for each pig sent to the processing plant before
it is slaughtered.

Rochester, Minnesota: Have anti-inflammatory interventions, such as
corticosteroids, improved clinical status?

David Brown: High-dose steroid (Solumedrol) has been given to
numerous patients, with improvement. Those who have not improved have
also gotten intravenous immunoglobulin. I believe at least a couple
of people have not had much improvement with either, or at least not
lasting improvement.

La Paz, Bolivia: Does this disease come with loss of leg muscular mass?

David Brown: I have not heard whether there is loss of muscle mass. I
frankly didn't ask the 2 physicians I spoke to. I suspect that if
loss of muscle was a prominent part of the illness they would have
mentioned it. But obviously that's just a guess on my part.

Cincinnati, Ohio: What are the most likely specific components of the
pig brain that are affecting these workers? Why do you think this
hasn't been recognized previously in these workers?

David Brown: The scientists are looking at a wide array of molecules
and structures on the nerve fibers and axons that may be stimulating
the immune response. There are a huge number of possibilities and no
results are available yet.

The "why now?" question is always an interesting one for new
diseases. If the past experience with other new diseases holds here,
we can be quite certain that a few cases occurred before the "index"
(or 1st case) was detected in this cluster. It always takes a while
for signal to be detected over noise. Which is to say there were
probably some cases in the past, including some that may have come to
medical attention. But their work-related nature and the association
with the "head table," etc. were not recognized. What happened that
made the cases more frequent now, and therefore made the cluster
detectable, is not known. It may be there was some subtle change in
brain-harvesting technique that was not even recognized by the
workers themselves or the plant management. There are people trying
to answer this, but it may be hard.

Columbia, Missouri: So what's the big deal? This isn't an outbreak in
a true classical sense with an infectious disease, nor does it seem
to be a food safety issue.

Michael T Osterholm: QPP and the state and federal investigators take
this situation very seriously as it is truly an outbreak of a
significant disease in workers. For that reason the 1st order of
business was to determine the likely source of exposure to the factor
responsible for the cases and eliminate that. So, ending the use of
high-pressure air extraction of the brains has accomplished this
(that is, no new cases with onset of illness since the process was
stopped.) This is an example of the classic "pulling the pump
handle." That is always the 1st order of priority in an outbreak
investigation -- make certain there are no new cases. Then the
investigation continues to document what happened so that safeguards
can be put into place so that a similar outbreak or ongoing case
occurrence never happens again. Finally, every effort is being made
to find out what actually caused the illness to try and help the
remaining cases that have not fully recovered do so with an
appropriate medical treatment.

David Brown: By the way, "pulling the pump handle" refers to the
action that ended a cholera outbreak in London in 1854. John Snow, a
physician, charted the cases in the epidemic and found that they
clustered around a pump on Broad Street, where people went to get
water. The authorities took the handle off the pump, preventing
people's exposure to the contaminated water there, and the epidemic
stopped. John Snow is considered the father of modern clinical epidemiology.

Appleton, Wisconsin: During the evaluation process, was there any
airborne collection that could quantify "material" in the air? Were
there any variations in the sanitation processes?

Michael T Osterholm: These studies have been undertaken. To date
there have been no remarkable findings, particularly that explain the
clustering of cases in the head bench area. There were no significant
changes in any aspect of plant sanitation; this plant has always had
an outstanding record in plant sanitation as determined by the USDA
(US Department of Agriculture) and even the employee union.

David Brown: It's worth noting that everyone says that everyone is
cooperating with everyone else. There are no reports of company
resistance to any part of the investigation.

Baltimore, Maryland: What technique do the other plants use to
extract the brain? Should there be a restriction on harvesting of any
brain tissue until the etiology is understood?

Michael T Osterholm: Other plants do harvest pig brains as there is
high demand for them in many areas of the world. However, these
plants use a mechanical cutting of the skull for removal. None of
these plants have reported a similar human illness to date however
only limited case ascertainment has been done in these plants. If
this illness was associated with an infectious disease in pigs we
would have expected to see human cases in other plants where these
pigs brains are handled. This is one more piece of evidence that
these illnesses are not due to an infectious agent.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This online discussion clarifies some additional information about
respiratory protection (there wasn't any), the source of the
Minnesota swine (local), and other issues. It does not mention that
an additional case seems to have cropped up in the plant (see
ProMED-mail Progr infl neuropathy, pork plant workers - USA (03) (MN)
20080206.0493) but in an area not close to the other cases. - Mod.LL]
See Also
Progr infl neuropathy, pork plant workers - USA (03) (MN) 20080206.0493
Progr infl neuropathy, pork plant workers - USA:(02) (IN,MN) 20080205.0470
Progr infl neuropathy, pork plant workers - USA: (IN,MN) 20080201.0405
Undiagnosed neuro. synd., porcine plant workers - USA (02): (IN, MN)
20080129.0366
Undiagnosed neuro. synd., porcine plant workers - USA: (IN, MN) 20080118.0226
2007
----
Undiagnosed neuro. synd., porcine plant workers - USA: (MN), RFI 20071204.3915
...................................ll/mj/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
