<header id=026523>
Published Date: 2011-09-18 18:30:54 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (06): (NJ, PA)
Archive Number: 20110918.2842
</header>
<body id=026523>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (06): (NEW JERSEY,
PENNSYLVANIA)
*****************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this report:
[1] New Jersey
[2] Pennsylvania

******
[1]New Jersey
Date: 15 Sep 2011
Source: Basking Ridge Patch [edited]
http://baskingridge.patch.com/articles/bernards-deer-among-those-that-may-be-dying-from-area-wide-disease?


Township police report having received about 24 reports over the past
week on deer that may be displaying signs of an outbreak of a
species-specific disease, epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD), that
state officials assure is not a danger to humans.

The dying or dead deer are often found close to water sources, as they
try to drink due to internal hemorrhaging that is caused by the
disease or their feverish condition, according to police and state
reports. That may be why some people have been associating the dying
deer with drinking from local water supplies, noted Township Police
Lt. Ted Reese, in a response to a question about residents reporting
the dead deer.

EHD is a viral infection that is spread by the bite of a midge or gnat
that has been infected with the virus, according to information issued
by township police, and also on the township website.

A spokesman for the state Department of Environmental Protection,
Larry Ragonese, on Thursday [15 Sep 2011] morning said that state
field inspectors have tested deer in nearby Harding Township, in
Morris County, and in the Great Swamp area, and they have tested
positive for the disease.

However, he said the state had no reports from Bernards Township
specifically as of that time. The virus does not affect humans and is
not transmissible to humans, assured state and local health officials.
EHD is common in the southeast portion of the country, the website
said. Deer suffering from EHD exhibit the following signs: loss of
fear of humans, swelling of the head, neck, and tongue, respiratory
distress, internal hemorrhaging and death within days of infection,
according to information from both the state DEP, and also on the
township website.

Ragonese said that he cannot say how many deer have died in the area
as of this time. However, he said that Bernards is an area that will
more likely have midges, small insects that live in the mud of the
Passaic River watershed. He said the infected insects will die off as
the weather cools into temperatures in the 40s through the 60s (F) and
will completely die off in freezing weather.

At that point, the insects will no longer infect the deer, which he
said die fairly quickly of the disease. EHD outbreaks are periodic and
sporadic, and there is no reason to believe it will return to the area
next spring [2012], Ragonese said.

According to the Bernards Township Department of Health, residents are
responsible for disposing of deer which die on their property.
However, they also can report dead deer or those displaying symptoms
of EHD to township police. The message then will be passed along to
the health department, which will contact the state, which then may
decide to test the deer remains to confirm whether the animal died of
EHD, according to the health department.

Under normal circumstances, police involvement with dead or dying deer
is almost always related to deer involved in vehicle accidents, said a
statement issued by Reese. "When we respond to a dead deer on a
roadway within the township, we determine whether the roadway is a
county or municipal roadway. We then contact the appropriate deer
carcass removal contractor," he said.

However, Reese added that EHD has created an abnormal situation with
an increase in dead deer. "We are contacting our deer carcass removal
contractors, as per our policy, for all dead deer found on township
roadways," he said in an email on Thursday [15 Sep 2011] morning.

Removal of deer that die on private property are the responsibility of
the property owner, including the cost of the deer removal, he said.
Residents that need to have dead deer removed from private property
can contact D&N RECOVERY 908-876-3341, police suggested.

Residents also can file a direct report of sighted deer exhibiting
signs of EHD, such as difficulty standing, drooling, emitting foam
from the mouth or nose, or dead deer with no apparent wounds, observed
in or near water, to the Division's Office of Fish and Wildlife Health
Forensics by calling Bill Stansley at (908) 236-2118 or Carole Stanko
at (908) 735-7040.

Earlier in August 2011, the DEP's Division of Fish and Wildlife
advised hunters and other outdoors enthusiasts in the East Amwell,
Hopewell and Hillsborough areas of west-central New Jersey to be alert
for white-tailed deer that wildlife biologists believe are
experiencing symptoms of EHD, described as a localized virus.

"EHD is not a public health issue," according to a news release from
the DEP. "It cannot be transmitted to people, and humans are not at
risk by handling infected deer, being bitten by infected midges, or
eating infected deer meat."

Nevertheless, in the news release, the Division of Fish and Wildlife
strongly advises against consuming meat from any game animal that
appears ill. Ragonese said such advice is standard, and a hunter
should not worry about consuming meat from an animal that may have
been infected but not yet displaying symptoms. He said any experienced
hunter could recognize that the infected deer are not healthy.

Although livestock can be infected with EHD, the disease is relatively
benign in livestock and is likely to go unnoticed, according to the
DEP. "A number of people have reported seeing deer that exhibit signs
of EHD," said David Chanda, Director of the DEP's Division of Fish and
Wildlife. "The Division is asking the public to report any deer
showing symptoms of the disease to help us monitor the impact on the
local deer herd."

EHD is a common viral disease in deer that is contracted from the bite
of a species of midge known as _Culiocoides sonorensis_. It does not
spread from deer to deer. EHD outbreaks end with the onset of colder
weather, which will kill midges that spread the disease. New Jersey
has documented occasional, localized outbreaks of EHD in different
parts of the state for more than 50 years, with the last occurring in
fall 2010 in Salem County, the DEP said.

Deer typically die within 5-10 days of infection. Infected deer
initially lose their appetite and fear of people. They grow
progressively weaker and often salivate excessively. As the disease
progresses, infected deer breathe heavily and develop a fever.
Fever-ridden deer may go to water to drink or in an attempt to cool
off. Eight to 36 hours following the onset of observable signs, the
infected deer pass into a shock-like state, become prostrate and die.

[Byline: Linda Sadlouskos]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Bernards Township is located in Somerset county, New Jersey. For the
map of New Jersey with counties, see
http://www.digital-topo-maps.com/county-map/new-jersey.shtml. For
the interactive HealthMap/ProMED map of Bernards Township, see
http://healthmap.org/r/1fy4. - Mod.MPP]

******
[2] Pennsylvania
Date: 16 Sep 2011
Source: Wayne Independent [edited]
http://www.wayneindependent.com/news/x524580977/Game-commission-Virus-killed-farmed-Pa-deer


State wildlife officials say a virus killed nearly 100 deer on an
eastern Pennsylvania farm in the 1st outbreak of the illness in the
state since 2007.

The Morning Call http://www.mcall.com in Allentown reports the deer
at a breeding operation in Danielsville, Northampton County started
dying in August 2011. The Pennsylvania Game Commission says the deer
died of epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD). The virus is not harmful
to humans, but wildlife officials advise against eating the meat of
infected deer.

The Morning Call report (http://bit.ly/ph5rzU) says the virus is
more common in the south. Outbreaks have also been reported in New
York and New Jersey in the last month.

The virus is transmitted by small flies, called midges. Game officials
say the midges will be killed by the 1st frost.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[For a map of Pennsylvania with counties, see
http://www.digital-topo-maps.com/county-map/pennsylvania.shtml. For
the interactive HealthMap/ProMED map of Danielsville Pennsylvania, see
http://healthmap.org/r/1fy5 (according to this map, Danielsville is
listed in Lehigh county, the adjacent county to Northampton county in
Pennsylvania, but according to all other records, Danielsville is
located in Northampton county). - Mod.MPP]

[The epizootic hemorrhagic disease viruses belong to the genus
_Orbivirus_, family _Reoviridae_. Ten serotypes of EHDV are known
worldwide. Of the 10 serotypes known worldwide, the only 2 serotypes
currently endemic in North America are EHDV-1 and EHDV-2.

The viruses of the EHDV serogroup are transmitted by biological
vectors, usually biting midges in the genus _Culicoides_. In North
America, _C. variipennis_ is the major vector. Some species of gnats
and mosquitoes can also transmit EHDV. Infected deer can be viremic
for up to 2 months.

The incubation period for epizootic hemorrhagic disease in deer is
5-10 days.

Three syndromes may be seen in deer. Peracute disease is characterized
by high fever, anorexia, weakness, respiratory distress, and severe
and rapid edema of the head and neck. Swelling of the tongue and
conjunctivae is common. Deer with the peracute form usually die
rapidly, typically within 8-36 hours; some animals may be found dead
with few clinical signs. In the acute form (classical EHD), these
signs may be accompanied by extensive hemorrhages in many tissues
including the skin, heart, and gastrointestinal tract. There is often
excessive salivation and nasal discharge, which may both be
blood-tinged. Animals with the acute form can also develop ulcers or
erosions of the tongue, dental pad, palate, rumen, and omasum. High
mortality rates are common in both the peracute and acute forms.

In the chronic form, deer are ill for several weeks but gradually
recover. After recovery, these deer sometimes develop breaks or rings
in the hooves caused by growth interruptions, and may become lame. In
severe cases, animals slough the hoof wall or toe; some of these deer
may be found crawling on their knees or chest. Deer with the chronic
form may also develop ulcers, scars, or erosions in the rumen;
extensive damage to the lining of the rumen can cause emaciation even
when there is no shortage of food.

In North America, most outbreaks of epizootic hemorrhagic disease
occur in late summer or early autumn, and are often associated with
wet weather. The onset of freezing weather usually stops the
appearance of new cases, but hoof sloughing can be seen throughout the
year. Among the _Cervidae_, epizootic hemorrhagic disease is most
severe in white-tailed deer. In this species, the morbidity and
mortality rates may be as high as 90 percent. However, the severity of
the disease varies from year to year. It also varies with the
geographic location. In the southeastern U.S., most cases are mild,
and the mortality rates are low. In the midwest and northeast, EHD
typically recurs each year, but can vary from a few scattered cases to
severe epizootics with high mortality rates. This variability is
thought to be caused by many factors including the abundance and
distribution of the insect vectors, the EHDV serotype, existing herd
immunity, and genetic variations in the susceptibility of the host.
Surviving deer develop long-lived neutralizing antibodies. Nearly 100
percent of the deer population can be seropositive in some regions.

Acute or peracute EHD should be suspected in deer with swelling of the
head and neck, respiratory distress, or excessive blood-tinged
salivation. This disease should also be considered in cases of sudden
death, particularly when the animal is found dead near water (an
indication of high fever). Chronic disease can be the cause of hoof
abnormalities and emaciation.

In deer, the differential diagnosis includes foot-and mouth disease,
bluetongue, and plant photosensitization. A hemorrhagic disease caused
by an adenovirus has also been described in deer in California.

Although epizootic hemorrhagic disease is endemic in the US, it is a
reportable disease in some states. State authorities should be
consulted for more specific information. Only EHDV-1 and EHDV-2 are
currently found in the US.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/epizootic_hemorrhagic_disease.pdf.
- Mod.TG]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (05): (NY) 20110911.2767
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (04): (NJ) 20110911.2762
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (03): (KS,MT) 20110904.2704
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ) 20110826.2601
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
2010
----
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (04): (NJ) 20101022.3823
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (03): (MI) 20101001.3565
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA (02): (MT) 20100923.3433
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, bovine - Guadeloupe: OIE 20100904.3175
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervid - USA: (IL) 20100819.2880
.................................................sb/tg/msp/mpp
</body>
