<header id=045173>
Published Date: 2011-06-19 16:03:27 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (28): USA (ME)
Archive Number: 20110619.1881
</header>
<body id=045173>
HANTAVIRUS UPDATE 2011 - AMERICAS (28): USA (MAINE)
***************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Fri 17 Jun 2011
Source: CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports - Notes from the
Field, Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome [edited]
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6023a4.htm?s_cid=mm6023a4_e&source=govdelivery


On 25 Apr 2011, the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention
was notified of a suspected case of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
(HPS) in a man aged 70 years with no recent out-of-state travel.

The Maine resident went to a community hospital in early April 2011
with a 5-day history of fatigue, decreased appetite, weakness, chills,
myalgias, and progressive shortness of breath. On examination, he was
hypoxic and tachypneic. The patient was admitted with laboratory
evidence of acute renal insufficiency, leukocytosis and
thrombocytopenia, and appearance of diffuse bilateral infiltrates on
chest radiograph. Two days later, he was transferred to a
tertiary-care facility for management of respiratory failure with
hypoxemia and worsening renal insufficiency. The next day, he was
intubated and mechanically ventilated. Serum specimens demonstrated
high titers of hantavirus reactive immunoglobulin M (1:6400) and
immunoglobulin G (1:1600) antibodies. Hantavirus RNA was detected in
the patient's blood. The patient was discharged to a skilled nursing
facility one month after admission and is recovering with extensive
rehabilitation.

HPS is caused by hantavirus infections. The viruses are transmitted
to humans by exposure to excreta or direct contact with infected
rodents. An investigation revealed that the patient had potential
exposure to rodent excreta on his farm. A grain storage shed was not
rodent-proof and had grain on the floor. The patient reportedly had
climbed a ladder to place rodenticide in the upper level of the shed,
where insulation was contaminated with rodent droppings.

HPS is a life-threatening illness 1st identified in 1993 following an
outbreak of unexplained, severe pulmonary illness in the southwestern
United States (1). As of 15 Dec 2010, a total of 560 HPS cases from 32
states had been reported to CDC, including 529 since 1993; until this
case, none of the cases had been diagnosed or contracted in Maine (2).
However, potential reservoirs for pathogenic hantaviruses exist across
the entire continental United States (3). This case highlights the
importance of clinician and public awareness of HPS and avoidance of
risk factors for hantavirus infection (i.e., exposure to rodent
droppings in the home, vacation home, workplace, or campsite), even in
regions of the United States that have not had documented cases
previously. Early recognition of HPS can reduce mortality.

References:

CDC. Outbreak of acute illness---southwestern United States, 1993.
MMWR 1993;42:421--4.

CDC. U.S. HPS cases, by state. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health
and Human Services, CDC. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/surveillance/state-of-exposure.html.
Accessed 10 Jun 2011>.

Mills JN, Amman BR, Glass GE. Ecology of hantaviruses and their hosts
in North America. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2010;10:563--74.

[Reported by: Mohamad Mooty, MD, Imad Durra, MD, Div of Infectious
Diseases, Eastern Maine Medical Center, Bangor; Vicki Rea, MPH,
Patricia Snyder, MPH, Stephen D. Sears, MD, Lauren B. Ball, DO, Maine
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Adam MacNeil, PhD, Shelley
Campbell, Gregory Kocher, Ute Str√∂her, PhD, Pierre E. Rollin, MD,
Stuart T. Nichol, PhD, Div of High-Consequence Pathogens and
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious
Diseases; Susan E. Manning, MD, Career Epidemiology Field Officer
Program, CDC. Corresponding contributor: Susan E. Manning,
<susan.manning@maine.gov>]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Unfortunately, this report does not indicate which hantavirus was
involved in this case. There are 3 hantaviruses likely to occur in
Maine: Sin Nombre virus, Monongahela virus and New York virus. All 3
can cause HPS. The rodent host of Sin Nombre and Monongahela viruses
is _Peromyscus manicuatus_, and _P. leucopus_ is the host of New York
virus.

An image of _Peromyscus maniculatus_ can be accessed at
http://share3.esd105.wednet.edu/rsandelin/Fieldguide/Animalpages/Mammals/Land%20mammals.htm#Deer_mouse.

An image of _P. leucopus_ can be accessed at
http://www.fcps.edu/islandcreekes/ecology/Mammals/White-footed%20Mouse/pleucopus1m1.jpg.

A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Maine in the
northeastern USA can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/r/00B0. -
Mod.TY]
See Also
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (27) USA (NM) 20110527.1625
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (26): Chile, Argentina, USA 20110523.1562
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (23): USA, Chile 20110422.1265
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (13): USA (OR) 20110315.0827
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas (05): USA (NM) 20110124.0289
Hantavirus update 2011 - Americas: Chile, USA 20110106.0077
.................................................mpp/ty/msp/mpp
</body>
