<header id=031883>
Published Date: 2011-06-15 12:17:59 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> E. coli O104 - EU (19): case update, organism description
Archive Number: 20110615.1823
</header>
<body id=031883>
E. COLI O104 - EUROPEAN UNION (19): CASE UPDATE, ORGANISM DESCRIPTION
*********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this update:
[1] ECDC update
[2] WHO update
[3] Eurosurveillance: EaggEC VTEC O104:H4: further description
[4] Eurosurveillance: EaggEC VTEC O104:H4: discussion

******
[1] ECDC update
Date: Wed 15 Jun 2011
Source: ECDC [edited]
http://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/activities/sciadvice/Lists/ECDC%20Reviews/ECDC_DispForm.aspx?List=512ff74f%2D77d4%2D4ad8%2Db6d6%2Dbf0f23083f30&ID=1113&RootFolder=%2Fen%2Factivities%2Fsciadvice%2FLists%2FECDC%20Reviews


In the EU/EEA, 821 HUS cases, including 24 deaths, and 2530 non-HUS
cases, including 13 deaths, have been reported so far. Today [15 Jun
2011], Germany reports 2 new HUS cases and 17 new non-HUS STEC cases.
It also reports a new HUS death. In Luxembourg, one STEC case newly
developed HUS.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[By noting the EU number of cumulative cases of HUS and non-HUS cases
and their total as well as deaths, the daily rise of the numbers can
be looked at:

Date: New HUS / New non-HUS / New Total / Overall Total Deaths
Mon 6 Jun: 3 / 67 / 70 / 22
Tue 7 Jun: 13 / 83 / 96 / 23
Wed 8 Jun: 48 / 266 / 314 / 25
Thu 9 Jun: 35 / 121 / 156 / 27
Fri 10 Jun: 38 / 115 / 153 / 31
Sat 11 Jun: 14 / 177 / 191 / 35
Sun 12 Jun: 0 / 40 / 40 / 35
Mon 13 Jun: 8 / 34 / 42 / 36
Tue 14 Jun: 1 / 6 / 7 / 36
Wed 15 Jun: 3 / 17 / 20 / 37

The cases do not necessarily reflect date of onset of disease but
rather when the diagnosis was made and reported. The number of newly
reported cases per day clearly decreased from the corresponding day in
the previous week. - Mod.LL]

******
[2] WHO update
Date: Wed 15 Jun 2011
Source: WHO [edited]
http://www.euro.who.int/en/what-we-do/health-topics/emergencies/internat=ional-health-regulations/news/news/2011/06/ehec-outbreak-update-16


On 10 Jun 2011, authorities from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), the
Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) and the Federal Office of
Consumer Protection and Food Safety (BVL) jointly stated that mounting
epidemiological and food-chain evidence indicated that bean and seed
sprouts (including fenugreek, mung beans, lentils, adzuki beans and
alfalfa) are the vehicle of the outbreak in Germany caused by the
unusual enteroaggregative verocytotoxin-producing _E. coli_ (EAggEC
VTEC) O104:H4 bacterium.

Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)
-------------------------------
As of 14 Jun 2011 at 15:00 CET, Germany had reported 784 HUS cases
(including 23 fatalities): 2 more cases and one more death since the
previous day. 68 percent of cases were in females and 88 percent in
adults aged 20 years or older, with the highest attack rates per 100
000 population in the group aged 20-49 years. Case-onset dates ranged
from 1 May to 8 Jun 2011.

Enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ (EHEC)
---------------------------------
As of 14 Jun 2011 at 15:00 CET, 2470 cases of EHEC infection (without
HUS) had been reported in Germany (13 fatal): 17 more cases and no
more deaths since the previous day. 59 percent of cases were in
females and 87 percent in adults aged 20 years or older. Case-onset
dates ranged from 1 May to 11 Jun 2011.

On 15 Jun 2011, RKI stated that, for approximately the past week, the
number of notified HUS/EHEC cases reported to it had markedly
declined. Data from sentinel surveillance of bloody diarrhea in
hospital emergency departments also suggest a decrease in the absolute
and relative numbers of cases presenting since 30 May 2011. It is
still uncertain whether this decline in outbreak activity is due to
changing consumption of raw vegetables and/or the waning of the source
of infection.

Other countries
---------------
As of 14 Jun 2011, 13 other European countries had reported a total
of 36 HUS cases (1 fatal) and 66 EHEC cases (none fatal): In addition,
the CDC in the USA published information on 3 HUS cases (1 confirmed
and 2 suspected) and 2 suspected EHEC cases (without HUS) in the USA
linked to this outbreak. On 7 Jun 2011, the Public Health Agency of
Canada reported on one suspected case of _E. coli_ O104 infection
(without HUS) in a person with travel history to northern Germany and
with links to a confirmed case of _E. coli_ O104 infection in
Germany.

Since 10 Jun 2011, no more HUS or EHEC cases or deaths have been
reported from outside Germany.

There are 3343 HUS and EHEC cases in total, including 37 fatalities.
All but 5 of the above HUS and EHEC cases were in people who had
traveled to or lived in Germany during the incubation period for
infection, typically 3-4 days after exposure (range: 2-10 days).
Nevertheless, all 5 of these cases can be linked to the outbreak in
Germany.

Note: EHEC and HUS have exclusive notification categories, so case
numbers should not overlap. The figures in any rapidly evolving
outbreak, however, are provisional and subject to change for a variety
of reasons.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The WHO statistics importantly show that cases have had onset of
symptoms as late as 11 Jun 2011 despite the publicity regarding the
outbreak. - Mod.LL]

******
[3] Eurosurveillance: EaggEC VTEC O104:H4: further description
Date: Tue 14 Jun 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance E-alert Volume 16, Issue 24, 16 Jun 2011
[edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19889


Characteristics of the enteroaggregative Shiga
toxin/verotoxin-producing _E. coli_ O104:H4 strain causing the
outbreak of HUS in Germany, May to June 2011
------------------------------
The _E. coli_ strain causing a large outbreak of hemolytic uremic
syndrome and bloody diarrhea in Germany in May and June 2011 possesses
an unusual combination of pathogenic features typical of
enteroaggregative _E. coli_ together with the capacity to produce
Shiga toxin. Through rapid national and international exchange of
information and strains, the known occurrence in humans was quickly
assessed. We describe simple diagnostic screening tools to detect the
outbreak strain in clinical specimens and a novel real-time PCR for
its detection in foods.

Sequence of events
------------------
Having received the 1st Early Warning Response System (EWRS) alert
issued by the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) in Germany on 23 May 2011
about an increase in the number of patients presenting with hemolytic
uremic syndrome (HUS) and bloody diarrhea caused by Shiga
toxin-producing _E. coli_ (STEC), with more than 30 possible cases
reported since the 2nd week of May 2011, the WHO Collaborating Centre
(WHO CC) for Reference and Research on _Escherichia_ and _Klebsiella_
at Statens Serum Institut (SSI) in Denmark issued an alert to the
Danish _E. coli_ network of regional hospitals on the same day. On 24
May 2011, Hvidovre University hospital reported a German patient who
had been diagnosed with Shiga toxin/verotoxin-producing _E. coli_
(STEC/VTEC) and referred the strain to SSI. The WHO CC found that this
1st isolate was of serotype O104:H4 and produced Shiga toxin
(Stx)/verotoxin (VT) as also reported by RKI.

Referral from other regional hospitals identified the German outbreak
strain in further patients in Denmark during the next days. This
information was immediately shared by postings on the Urgent Inquiry
Network (UIN) Epidemic Intelligence Information System (EPIS) hosted
by the Food and Waterborne Diseases and Zoonoses (FWD) Surveillance
Network of the European Centre for Disease Control and Prevention
(ECDC), and emails to FWD, the European Union Reference Laboratory for
_E. coli_ (EU-RL) and the 2 associated networks including public
health (ECDC) and food safety (EU-RL) reference laboratories, the
Global Food-borne Infections Network (GFN), Food Safety, WHO Geneva
and the WHO Regional Office for Europe, and PulseNet at the CDC in the
USA.

Having verified the specific characteristics of 8 of the Danish
outbreak strains, the WHO CC sent the index strain and the reference
strain for the O104 antigen to the EU-RL in Rome. The strains were
received on 31 May 2011 and tested positive by the EU-RL using a novel
real-time PCR developed at the EU-RL and its network for detection of
_E. coli_ strains of serotype O104:H4. Thus, within a week, screening
tools and a novel PCR protocol for detection of the outbreak strain in
clinical specimens and in foods were developed, tested and shared with
national as well as international networks. In return, members of the
networks contributed with their existing knowledge of _E. coli_
strains of serotype O104:H4, thereby collectively adding to the
existing knowledge of this pathogen and describing the relevant
characteristics of the reported strains for public health
investigation.

The outbreak strain
------------------
The Danish isolates were PCR-positive for the aggR gene, which is
typical of enteroaggregative _E. coli_ (EAggEC). Further analysis
showed that the outbreak strain (1st 8 isolates from Danish patients)
were also positive for the following genes: sigA, sepA, pic, aatA,
aaiC, aap, as well as aggA, which encodes the major component of the
AAF/I adhesin. AAF/I is a fimbrial organelle usually associated with a
strong ability to form biofilms and haemagglutination with human
erythrocytes. Preliminary testing at WHO CC showed that the isolates
were moderate to good biofilm producers particularly in Dulbecco's
minimum essential medium (DMEM) supplemented with 0.45 percent
glucose, which is typical and defining for EAggEC strains. The
outbreak strain was a typical _E. coli_: lactose-positive,
sorbitol-fermenting and beta-glucuronidase-positive. Furthermore, the
strain was positive for iutA encoding an aerobactin receptor found in
80 percent of extraintestinal pathogenic _E. coli_ isolated from
urosepsis (2) and negative for the STEC-associated adhesin (saa) and
cytotoxin subtilase (subAB).

Taken together, these data indicate that the outbreak strain is
indeed a typical EAggEC strain that has acquired the bacteriophage
encoding Stx/VT. Using a novel protocol for subtyping of stx/vtx genes
(3), we have shown that the gene encoding Stx/VT is stx2a/vtx2a.

Sequence analysis of the published stx2a/vtx2a sequence (SRX067313 on
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) showed 100 percent amino acid
identity of the holotoxin to Stx2a/VT2a from _E. coli_ O157:H7 EDL933
isolated from Michigan ground beef in 1983 (accession number X07865
(4)) but differed by one nucleotide at position 867 (C instead of T),
making the nucleotide sequence identical to the sequence found in
sorbitol-fermenting O157 strains from Germany in 2002 and 2005
(accession numbers AY143336 and AY143337, unpublished), DQ231589 and
DQ231590 (5), and Scotland in 2006 (EU526759) (6). This sequence
variant of stx2a/vtx2a has also been detected in isolates from
seagulls (accession number AB030484, unpublished) and human isolates
of different serotypes: _E. coli_ O121:H19 from Canada (DQ143182 and
DQ143183) (7) and Idaho, USA (EF441611) (8), and O111:H8 also from
Idaho, USA (EF441606) (8).

These findings could explain the unexpectedly high level of virulence
in a STEC/VTEC strain negative for the attaching/effacing
pathogenicity island. It is indeed conceivable that the
enteroaggregative adherence phenotype could have allowed these _E.
coli_ O104 strains to colonize the intestinal mucosa of the affected
patients as efficiently as the typical eae-positive STEC/VTEC strains.
The different mechanism of adhesion might also explain why this strain
is more likely to cause severe disease in adults rather than in
children, as would be usual for typical HUS-associated STEC/VTEC:
adults and children might differ in their susceptibility to the
adherence and/or colonization properties of this type of EAggEC
strain. Obviously, elucidating this aspect requires dedicated studies,
and we cannot exclude that the different rates of HUS between adults
and children observed in the current outbreak just reflect a
difference in the exposures.

Screening for the outbreak strain
-------------------------------
Plating clinical samples on extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)
plates, such as commercially available Tryptone Bile X-Glucuronide
(TBX) medium, will allow growth of the outbreak strain and inhibit the
majority of other _E. coli_ strains. Excellent growth of the index
strain (only one of the strains has been tested so far) from the
outbreak has also been observed as light red colonies on cefixime
tellurite sorbitol MacConkey (CT-SMAC) plates at 37 C, 41.5 C and 44 C
(Jeppe Boel, personal communication, 3 Jun 2011). Since cefixime
belongs to the class of cephalosporins, it seems likely that the
strain can overcome the cefixime concentration in CT-SMAC, but
apparently it is also able to overcome the tellurite concentration.

For quick screening of clinical samples, K9 antiserum for live slide
agglutination can be used in both primary and secondary testing
laboratories. This is because the O104 O antigen is identical to the
K9 capsular antigen (9). The K9 antiserum is readily available from
SSI Diagnostica, Hillerod, Denmark (<ivdorders@ssi.dk>) and described
on the SSI website (10). At SSI, we have agglutinated culture from
confluent growth, but pools of 5 to 10 individual colonies can also be
agglutinated. Immediate positive reactions indicating the presence of
_E. coli_ O104 have all been confirmed by conventional serotyping of O
and H antigen, presence of stx2a/vtx2a and lack of the eae gene. Based
on our observations so far, all weak reactions have turned out to be
negative for the outbreak strain. The strain can also be detected by a
number of methods targeting the stx2/vtx2 gene by PCR, RT-PCR or
commercial Stx/VT detection kits. The strain must also be negative for
the eae gene and confirmed for O104.

Food samples should be enriched in Buffered Peptone Water (225 ml for
25 g test portion) and incubated for 18 to 24 h at 37 C ± 1 degree C.
DNA extracted from a one ml aliquot is purified and tested for the
presence of stx/vtx genes (1st step of the real-time PCR procedure
described in the ISO/TS 13136:2011(E) method (11)).

Samples positive for stx/vtx genes (regardless of the presence of the
eae gene) are tested for the O104-associated gene (wzxO104) (12). The
wzxO104-positive enrichment cultures are plated onto 2 media: (i)
MacConkey agar, or TBX, or any other medium suitable for _E. coli_
isolation, and (ii) a more selective medium containing an antibiotic
supplement. Colonies positive for stx/vtx genes are identified for the
O104 antigen-associated gene wzxO104 and the gene encoding the H4
flagellar antigen, fliCH4 (12). Conventional serotyping can be
performed by standard methods (13). Other markers can be tested by
either conventional or real-time PCR for further characterisation. DNA
from an outbreak strain provided by the Robert Koch Institute to be
used as positive control in the PCR assays can be obtained from
Istituto Superiore di Sanita (ISS) in Rome (<crl.vtec@iss.dk>).

To the best of our knowledge, this unusual combination of virulence
factors of STEC/VTEC and EAggEC has rarely been described in humans. A
strain of serotype O111:H2 (14) caused a small outbreak of HUS in
France in 1995, but the episode involved children, as is typical for
STEC/VTEC (15). As in the present outbreak in Germany, the association
of the French strains with severe disease (HUS) supports the view that
this unusual combination of virulence factors might confer a very high
degree of virulence.

Serotype O104:H4
----------------
Sporadic cases of stx2/vtx2-positive _E. coli_ serotype O104:H4 have
been reported. These reports include 2 isolates from patients with HUS
in Germany in 2001 (16), one in France in 2004 (data from the
dedicated EU surveillance network Enter-net; not including clinical
information), one from a case of HUS in Korea in 2005 (17), 2 HUS
cases in the Republic of Georgia in 2009 (unpublished information
provided via PulseNet, USA CDC), and an uncomplicated case of
diarrhoea in Finland in 2010 (reported to FWD on EPIS). The isolates
from Germany 2001, Finland 2010 and the Republic of Georgia 2009 were
EAggEC and STEC/VTEC.

The strain from the Republic of Georgia had the following
characteristics: serotype O104:H4, Shiga toxin subtype stx2a,
eae-negative, haemolysin-negative, aatA-positive (EAggEC marker),
susceptible to ceftriaxone (unlike the current outbreak strain),
sorbitol-, lactose-, and beta-glucuronidase-positive, biochemically
consistent with _E. coli_, Shiga toxin production on the low end of
the spectrum, similar to that of the German strain (Peter
Gerner-Smidt, personal communication 7 Jun 2011 from PulseNet, US CDC,
and the Georgian team of investigators). At this time, we do not have
further information on the remaining O104:H4 STEC/VTEC isolates from
France and Korea.

In general, we have limited knowledge on EAggEC of this serotype: The
archetype isolate for the aggregative adherence fimbriae type III
(AAF/III, encoded by the agg3A gene) is strain 55989, which was
isolated during a study of EAggEC as a cause of persistent diarrhoea
in African patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
(18,19). In a recent study of childhood diarrhea in Mali, we
identified Stx/VT-negative EAggEC O104:H4 in 3 children with moderate
to severe diarrhea and from 3 healthy controls (unpublished data). The
3 EAggEC strains isolated from these cases were PCR-positive for
different combinations of aggR, aatA, aaiC, aap, astA, sepA, pic,
sigA, aggA, agg3C and agg3A.

We have compared the pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) profiles
of the available _E. coli_ O104:H4 isolates to elucidate the diversity
within this serotype, irrespective of the virulence profile. PFGE
typing using the enzymes XbaI and BlnI showed that the serotype
O104:H4 is diverse (Figure, [for figure, see original URL - Mod.LL]).
For XbaI, a high similarity of greater than 95 percent was seen for
the 2011 German outbreak isolates (isolated in Denmark, Germany and
the USA) and one of the isolates from Republic of Georgia. A large
cluster of isolates with greater than 90 percent similarity included
the German outbreak strain, the 2 Georgian cases from 2009, the
isolate from the Finnish patient (all stx2a/vtx2a and EAggEC) as well
as 3 of the stx/vtx-negative EAggEC isolates from patients in Mali.
The profiles of 5 of the stx/vtx-negative EAggEC isolates showed major
differences from the outbreak strain. The 11 Danish PFGE-typed
isolates related to the German outbreak had indistinguishable XbaI
profiles. One isolate from a case infected in Germany and diagnosed in
the US had a minor variation in the BlnI profile (profile provided by
PulseNet, USA CDC).

General characteristics of EAggEC
---------------------------------
EAggEC is a pathotype of diarrheagenic _E. coli_ defined as _E. coli_
that do not secrete the heat-stable or heat-labile toxins of
enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), and by its characteristic aggregative
or "stacked brick" pattern (AA) of adherence to HEp2-cells in culture
(20). This property is usually due to the presence of aggregative
adherence fimbriae (AAF), whose expression is regulated by the aggR
gene, located on the large EAggEC virulence plasmid termed pAA (21).
EAggEC infections are usually associated with watery diarrhea, which
is often persistent (20). Illness results from a complex interaction
between pathogen and host, which implicates the initial adherence of
the bacteria to the epithelium of terminal ileum and colon, by virtue
of the aggregative adherence fimbriae (characteristic aggregative
pattern), followed by a damage/secretion stage manifested by cytokine
release, mucosal toxicity, intestinal secretion and induction of
mucosal inflammation (22-26).

EAggEC is best known for its role in persistent diarrhea (greater
than 14 days) in infants and children in developing countries. Studies
in Mongolia (27), India (28), Brazil (29,30), Nigeria (31,32), Israel
(33), Venezuela (34), Congo (35) and many other countries, have
identified EAggEC as a highly prevalent (often the most prevalent) _E.
coli_ pathotype in infants. Further, the role of EAggEC as an
important pathogen in AIDS patients continues to develop, and EAggEC
now ranks among the most important enteric pathogens in this
population group (36,37). In a recent review of all published studies
of traveler's diarrhea, EAggEC was in aggregate 2nd only to ETEC as
the most common pathogen (38).

The 1st reported EAggEC outbreaks occurred in Mexico City before 1993
(year unpublished) where persistent diarrhea was reported. Five of the
infected children died as a consequence of the diarrhea. Both
outbreaks occurred in the malnutrition ward of a pediatric hospital
(39), demonstrating that EAggEC is not exclusively a disease of
infants under the age of 12 months (40). Itoh et al. described a
massive outbreak of EAggEC diarrhea among Japanese children in 1993
affecting nearly 2700 patients (41). Another EAggEC outbreak was
reported in a Serbian nursery in 1995 (42) in which 16 newborn babies
(duration of illness 3-9 days) and 3 infants (18-20 days) developed
diarrhea accompanied by pyrexia and weight loss. Outbreaks have also
been reported among adults in the UK (43) and a small outbreak of
EAggEC serotype O92:H33 was reported in Italy in which pecorino cheese
(from unpasteurized milk) was epidemiologically implicated (44). As
these outbreaks suggest, EAggEC is capable of causing diarrhea in
adults and children, even in the absence of Stx/VT. We believe that
this pre-existing diarrheagenic and outbreak potential, coupled with
the highly virulent Stx/VT, has resulted in a hypervirulent strain
currently circulating in Germany. It should also be noted that EAggEC
are common in all populations of the world, industrialized and
developing, but that no animal reservoir has been described. This
observation suggests the startling possibility that this new O104
stain may have the capacity to persist among human populations,
perhaps indefinitely.

(Editorial note: This article was published as an e-alert on 14 Jun
2011, ahead of the regular Eurosurveillance issue.

[Because there are 40+ of them, the references are available at the
original URL. - Mod.LL]

[Authors: Scheutz F, Moller Nielsen E, J Frimodt-Moller J, et al.]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This is an excellent discussion on this relatively unique outbreak
organism. As noted, if it were to persist in the human host without an
animal reservoir, this is not a good thing. Mother Nature continues to
impress in her role as a bioterrorist. - Mod.LL]

******
[4] Eurosurveillance: EaggEC VTEC O104:H4: discussion
Date: Tue 14 Jun 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance Volume 16, Issue 24, 16 Jun 2011 [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19890


EAggEC STEC/VTEC O104:H4 outbreak: new microbiological findings boost
coordinated investigations by European public health laboratories
----------------------------------------------
The search for the source and vehicle of the outbreak has been a long
and arduous process. Initial epidemiological findings pointed to raw
vegetables and salads consumed in northern Germany as likely vehicles
of infection and consequently led to the recommendation to abstain
from eating these vegetables raw in northern Germany (1). Extensive
investigations implicated an organic sprout farm in Lower Saxony near
Hamburg. Sprouts produced at this farm had been distributed to many of
the incriminated restaurants and catering facilities, and were thus
identified as a likely vehicle of infection. On 10 Jun 2011, German
public health and food safety authorities issued a joint statement
recommending people to abstain from consuming sprouts (4).

Initial laboratory analysis of clinical isolates from outbreak cases
performed at the German National Reference Centre for Salmonella and
other Bacterial Enteric Pathogens at the Robert Koch Institute, in
Wernigerode quickly revealed that the epidemic agent was an STEC
strain of rare serotype O104:H4, with production of Shiga toxin 2 (1).
Moreover, it was further atypical in that it lacked the
attaching/effacing pathogenicity island of virulent STEC strains, as
indicated by negative PCR results for the intimin (eae) and haemolysin
(hly) genes. All outbreak-related clinical isolates were found to be
multidrug resistant and displayed indistinguishable genomic
macrorestriction profiles by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE)
analysis.

In this issue of Eurosurveillance, a collaborative group of
investigators, led by the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and
Research on Escherichia and Klebsiella, report several intriguing and
important new findings on the nature and possible origin of the
epidemic strain (5) [see above. - Mod.LL]. Firstly, using
well-validated genotyping methods, Scheutz et al. provide convincing
evidence that the STEC strain causing the outbreak in Germany is in
fact not a typical virulent STEC strain but instead is a much rarer
hybrid pathotype that harbors the phage-mediated Shiga toxin
determinant with an enteroaggregative _E. coli_ (EAggEC) background,
more precisely described as enteroaggregative, Shiga
toxin/verotoxin-producing _E. coli_ (EAggEC STEC/VTEC). Secondly, they
also identify in this strain the presence of the receptor for
iron-chelating aerobactin, known to be a virulence factor associated
with the extra-intestinal _E. coli_ pathotype. Thirdly, they provide
new data attesting to a close genetic relatedness of the German
outbreak strain to previously described similar EAggEC STEC/VTEC
strains. These findings are relevant for identifying the ecological
reservoir and evolutionary origin of the epidemic agent, gaining a
better understanding of the biological determinants of unusual disease
severity and clinical complications seen in outbreak cases and the
design of specific diagnostic tools for detection and treatment of
STEC cases, and identification of the epidemic strain for accurate
outbreak monitoring.

So what do the findings tell us about the reservoir and origin of the
pathogen causing this outbreak? EAggEC is a common pathogen causing
diarrhea in travelers and persistent diarrhea in infants and young
children living in countries with poor sanitation (6,7). In contrast
to STEC strains that have an animal reservoir, mostly ruminants,
EaggEC strains have a human reservoir. Little is known about the
pathogenic role and epidemiological features of infections caused by
strains of the hybrid EAggEC STEC/VTEC pathotype. One HUS outbreak
caused by a strain of this mixed pathotype, but associated with a
distinct serotype, had been previously reported from France in 1998
(8).

Scheutz et al. report that 7 previously reported cases of diarrhea or
HUS worldwide caused by EAggEC O104:H4 have been identified: from
Germany in 2001, France in 2004, South Korea in 2005, Georgia in 2009
and Finland in 2010 (9,10). By PFGE analysis of EAggEC O104:H4 strains
that are positive and negative for the Shiga toxin (stx) gene, the
authors further demonstrate that, in contrast to the diversity seen
within this serotype, isolates from the 2011 German outbreak cases
exhibit a level of genetic similarity, which is also seen in the
EAggEC STEC/VTEC O104:H4 strain from an unpublished outbreak of HUS in
Georgia, which was investigated jointly by the United States Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and Georgian public health
authorities in 2009. However, no epidemiological link between these 2
outbreaks has been reported as yet, and, therefore, the meaning of
this finding remains elusive. Additional comparison of genomic
relatedness of the German 2011 epidemic strain with other previously
detected STEC O104:H4 strains causing sporadic HUS cases in other
parts of the world should provide a more complete understanding of the
potential reservoir and possible origin of the 2011 epidemic strain.

Another fascinating development stems from comparative genomics,
available in real time, to elucidate the ancestral origin of the 2011
outbreak strain. On 2 Jun 2011, further information on the nature of
the hybrid EAggEC STEC/VTEC pathotype of this strain came from whole
genome sequence information generated by 2 groups of German academic
investigators (11). Sequence information from a third isolate from a
patient was subsequently generated at the Health Protection Agency,
UK. The data sets from these sequencing initiatives were instantly
released for public access, resulting in data analysis among
bioinformaticians and other researchers around the world. Results from
these preliminary analyses have been rapidly communicated via blogs,
Twitter and private web pages, outside the standard peer-reviewed
scientific publication route. These initiatives have confirmed the
microbiological characterisation of the outbreak strain made in the
public health laboratories by targeted genotyping and phenotyping of
facultative _E. coli_ virulence genes. Most importantly, among
compared _E. coli_ genome sequences, the genome of the 2011 outbreak
strain clustered closest to an EAggEC strain isolated in 2002, with
the addition of stx2 and antibiotic resistance genes.

How do these microbiological findings help clinical and public health
laboratories detect and confirm cases in a timely and reliable manner?
Further to key information provided by the Robert Koch Institute on
strain screening and characterization, Scheutz et al. also propose an
alternative simple laboratory screening tool for detecting the 2011
German outbreak strain: a bacterial cell slide agglutination assay
with cross-reacting antiserum against the capsular K9 antigen. This
test, depending on reagent availability, can be used for the primary
laboratory detection of _E. coli_ O104:H4 in fecal specimens from
suspected cases. Therefore, this assay enhances the potential
capability of microbiology laboratories to detect and report cases
accurately to clinical practitioners treating the patients and to
public health authorities investigating the outbreak.

In summary, from a scientific perspective, the major findings
reported in this issue by Scheutz et al. shed light on the unusual
pathogenic features, prior occurrence in human pathology and likely
natural reservoir of the _E. coli_ strain causing the ongoing HUS and
diarrhoea outbreak in Germany. More studies are needed to understand
which and how these biological features of the bacterium actually
determined the unique clinical and epidemiological disease
manifestations in this outbreak.

Furthermore, from a public health perspective, it should be
emphasised that the microbiology findings and technical recommendation
presented were immediately shared by the authors through EU and
international public health and food safety laboratory alert networks.
This timely dissemination of key data to those who need to know has
included posting technical information on the European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC)-supported Epidemic Intelligence
Information System (EPIS) rapid exchange platform. The EPIS links
together all EU/EEA public health laboratories in the Food- and
Waterborne Diseases and Zoonoses network (FWD-Net). In parallel, the
European Union Reference Laboratory for Verotoxin-producing _E. coli_
rapidly developed a real-time PCR method to detect O104 somatic- and
H4 flagellar antigen-associated genes in food samples and shared it
with the EU veterinary and food safety reference laboratory network.
This approach illustrates how seamless collaboration between food and
public health laboratories, as well the power of harnessing advanced
molecular typing technology and electronic communication, can build
the laboratory capacity needed to respond appropriately to the
cross-border spread of a highly virulent food-borne pathogen.

(Editorial note: This article was published as an e-alert on 14 Jun
2011, ahead of the regular Eurosurveillance issue.)

[The references are available at the original URL. - Mod.LL]

[Authors: Struelens MJ, Palm D, Takkinen J]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>
See Also
E. coli O104 - EU (18): case update, antimicrobial use 20110614.1812
E. coli O104 - EU (17): case update, medical care stretched 20110613.1798
E. coli O104 - EU (16): case update, 20110610.1766
E. coli O104 - EU (15): case update, EaggEC VTEC O104:H4 20110609.1753
E. coli O104 - EU (14): case update, neurological symptoms 20110609.1747
E. coli O104 - EU (13): case update, new countries 20110607.1737
E. coli O104 - EU (12): sprout cultures negative so far 20110606.1731
E. coli O104 - EU (11): case update, poss. sprout source 20110605.1720
E. coli O104 - EU (10): USA commentary 20110605.1718
E. coli O104 - EU (09) & USA 20110603.1701
E. coli O104 - EU (08) & USA: genetic analysis, more cases 20110603.1692
E. coli O104 - EU (07) & USA 20110601.1678
E. coli O104 - EU (06) & USA 20110531.1666
E. coli O104 - EU (05): (Germany) monoclonal antibody trial 20110529.1646
E. coli O104 - EU (04): (Germany) more deaths & HUS cases 20110528.1635
E. coli O104 - EU (03): (Germany, EU ex Germany) alert 20110527.1629
E. coli O104 - EU (02): (Germany, EU ex Germany), alert 20110527.1620
E. coli O104 - EU: (Germany, Denmark, Sweden) Spanish cucumbers 20110526.1611
E. coli VTEC - Germany (04): O104, poss. salad source 20110526.1600
E. coli VTEC - Germany (03): O104, spread South 20110525.1587
E. coli VTEC - Germany (02): increased case burden 20110524.1578
E. coli VTEC - Germany: RFI 20110523.1566
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - Japan: O111, raw beef, alert 20110504.1378
2010
----
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - USA (07): O26, ground beef, alert, recall 20100831.3097
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - USA (06): O145, lettuce 20100528.1777
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - USA (03): O145, lettuce, recall 20100507.1483
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - USA (02): (OH, MI, NY) O145 20100505.1460
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - USA: (MI, OH) 20100427.1358
2008
----
E. coli VTEC non-O157, restaurant - USA (04): (OK), O111 20081201.3779
E. coli VTEC non-O157, restaurant - USA: (OK), O111 20080902.2748
E. coli VTEC non-O157, past. ice cream, 2007 - Belgium: Antwerp 20080218.0655
2007
----
E. coli VTEC non-O157, beef sausage - Denmark 20070602.1784
E. coli VTEC non-O157, 2000-2005 - USA (CT) 20070118.0240
2006
----
E. coli VTEC non-O157, lettuce - USA (UT)(02): background 20060905.2523
E. coli VTEC non-O157, lettuce - USA (UT) 20060904.2521
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - Norway (03) 20060416.1133
E. coli VTEC non-O157 - Norway 20060329.0947
E. coli VTEC non-O157, minced beef - Norway 20060304.0680
2005
----
E. coli O145, fatal - Slovenia 20050916.2739
2003
----
E. coli, VTEC non-O157 - UK (Scotland): correction 20030828.2166
E. coli, VTEC non-O157 - UK (Scotland) 20030825.2144
2001
----
E. coli O26 - South Korea 20010509.0896
1999
----
E. coli O111, diarrhea - USA (Texas) 19990707.1134
1997
----
E. coli, non-0157 - Belgium 19970610.1215
.................................................sb/mpp/ll/msp/mpp
</body>
