<header id=015591>
Published Date: 2011-11-04 05:34:57 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Sick building syndrome - USA: (NY) trichloroethylene susp
Archive Number: 20111104.3282
</header>
<body id=015591>
SICK BUILDING SYNDROME - USA: (NEW YORK) TRICHLOROETHYLENE SUSPECTED
********************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 2 Nov 2011
Source: New York Daily News [edited]
http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/bronx-school-recorded-hundreds-cases-sick-students-05-article-1.971349


The Bronx New School's nurse's office recorded hundreds of cases of
sick students since 2005. Students at a Bronx elementary school
suffered from ailments including headaches, nausea, vomiting, abnormal
gaits, and seizures before the building was closed because of toxic
contamination, according to records obtained under the Freedom of
Information Law.

Nursing logs list the health issues raised at the Bronx New School
from June 2005 through June 2011, but they do not draw a cause and
effect between the traces of trichloroethylene (TCE) found in the
building's air and the illnesses.

The Daily News sought the documents after TCE contamination forced the
school to relocate, and parents complained that large numbers of
students had been getting ill. They also said they were worried that
the chemical had produced the ailments.

The logs total more than 13 400 student visits over 59 months. The
conditions ranged from routine bruises, nosebleeds, and asthma, which
have no link with TCE, to nausea, vomiting, headaches, dizziness, gait
abnormalities, and seizures, which are among the symptoms produced by
TCE exposure. Over the period, there were more than 300 reports of
children vomiting in school, including 16 in the single month of May
2007; more than 500 reported headaches; 700 stomachaches, and 22
seizures.

Asked about the volume of nurse visits, city Health Department
spokeswoman Susan Craig said: "Some principals enforce a policy of
every complaint, even minor injuries or symptoms, being reported." She
added that the nurse at this particular school was apparently "very
diligent" in her reporting.

Efforts by The News to reach the nurse, Lynn Hendricks, were
unsuccessful. But in November 2009, she wrote to supervisors about
"immunity issues" among students and "ongoing issues with the air
conditioning and heating system" in the school building, according to
a source who saw her letter.

City Education Department officials announced in August [2011] that
the 300-student, kindergarten-to-5th-grade school had toxins. Air
testing had found unsafe levels of TCE in the building, which had been
converted from a factory to a school more than 20 years ago.

TCE, an industrial solvent, is a possible carcinogen. It is known to
cause headaches, dizziness and nausea -- and can damage the central
nervous system and the kidneys when inhaled in large quantities.

City Schools Chancellor Dennis Walcott ordered the building closed and
moved the students to a leased former Catholic school 2 miles [3 km]
away. Officials say the levels were not high enough to cause health
problems. They also say they had no earlier indication of
environmental problems at the school. They conducted air quality tests
earlier this year [2011] because the building's lease was up for
renewal. But parents who faced repeated inexplicable ailments with
their children are understandably skeptical.

"My son missed 17 days of school last year, and he became a walking
pill," a parent said. "He kept throwing up at school and having dizzy
spells. I was desperate. He would get fine and then he would relapse,
and he kept losing weight."

Last Wednesday [26 Oct 2011], parent leaders at Bronx New School met
with Walcott to urge further air testing of their new building.

The parents have rightfully demanded that the Education Department
establish a registry to track health problems among current and former
students and faculty.

So far, school officials have not made clear exactly what they aim to
do to investigate those problems. "We keep asking how far back they're
going to go in the registry and how much information they're going to
collect," parents association President Donele Harrison said.

After all, the records reviewed by The News go back only to 2005, but
the school was operating at that site for 20 years.

Harrison, for example, is still haunted by questions about what
happened to her nephew who attended Bronx New School in the late
1990s. When he was in the 6th grade, the boy -- who seemed in perfect
health -- died suddenly of acute kidney failure.

[Byline: Juan Gonzalez]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Trichloroethylene is a colorless liquid which is used as a solvent
for cleaning metal parts. Drinking or breathing high levels of
trichloroethylene may cause nervous system effects, liver, and lung
damage, abnormal heartbeat, coma, and possibly death.

Trichloroethylene (TCE) is a nonflammable, colorless liquid with a
somewhat sweet odor and a sweet, burning taste. It is used mainly as a
solvent to remove grease from metal parts, but it is also an
ingredient in adhesives, paint removers, typewriter correction fluids,
and spot removers.

Trichloroethylene is not thought to occur naturally in the
environment. However, it has been found in underground water sources
and many surface waters as a result of the manufacture, use, and
disposal of the chemical.

Trichloroethylene dissolves a little in water, but it can remain in
ground water for a long time. TCE quickly evaporates from surface
water, so it is commonly found as a vapor in the air. It evaporates
less easily from the soil than from surface water. It may stick to
particles and remain for a long time. TCE can stick to particles in
water, which will cause it to eventually settle to the bottom
sediment. However, TCE does not build up significantly in plants and
animals.

Since it is not reported to accumulate significantly in animals or
plants, removing the children from the source may be helpful in
restoring their health.

Exposures occur by breathing air in and around the home or work place
which has been contaminated with trichloroethylene vapors, from shower
water or household products such as spot removers and typewriter
correction fluid. Exposures can occur through contact such as
drinking, swimming, or showering in water that has been contaminated
with trichloroethylene. Contact with the skin or breathing
contaminated air while manufacturing trichloroethylene or using it at
work to wash paint or grease from skin or equipment.

Some studies with mice and rats have suggested that high levels of
trichloroethylene may cause liver, kidney, or lung cancer. Some
studies of people exposed over long periods to high levels of
trichloroethylene in drinking water or in workplace air have found
evidence of increased cancer. Although, there are some concerns about
the studies of people who were exposed to trichloroethylene, some of
the effects found in people were similar to effects in animals.

In its 9th Report on Carcinogens, the National Toxicology Program
(NTP) determined that trichloroethylene is "reasonably anticipated to
be a human carcinogen." The International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) has determined that trichloroethylene is "probably
carcinogenic to humans."

While there may be some evidence of TCE as a carcinogen, levels are
far from confirmed and studies are not conclusive.

The EPA has set a maximum contaminant level for trichloroethylene in
drinking water at 0.005 milligrams per liter (0.005 mg/L) or 5 parts
of TCE per billion parts water. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) has set an exposure limit of 100 parts of
trichloroethylene per million parts of air (100 ppm) for an 8-hour
workday, 40-hour workweek.

The article does not tell us at what levels the TCE has been found.
Neither is there clear indication if it could be smelled in the
building. It is like natural gas in some ways: if it can be smelled
then the level is too high.

The school board may do well to test the water in the building as
well.

If the entire school body is only 300, then the number of illnesses
seem rather high.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/tf.asp?id=172&tid=30 - Mod.TG]

[The Bronx is the northernmost of the 5 boroughs of New York City. It
can be located via the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at
http://healthmap.org/r/1o*k. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

.................................................sb/tg/mj/ml
</body>
