<header id=032629>
Published Date: 2011-09-01 11:52:09 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Avian influenza (56): mutation, vaccine efficacy, OIE
Archive Number: 20110901.2678
</header>
<body id=032629>
AVIAN INFLUENZA (56): MUTATION, VACCINE EFFICACY, OIE
*****************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 31 Aug 2011
Source: OIE press release [edited]
http://www.oie.int/for-the-media/press-releases/detail/article/avian-influenza-h5n1-clade-2321/


Avian influenza H5N1 clade 2.3.2.1
----------------------------------
OIE [the World Organisation for Animal Health] closely follows the
evolution of avian influenza in domestic and wild birds around the
world, and acknowledges the recent identification of an H5N1 virus
described as clade 2.3.2.1.

Small genetic changes are known to routinely occur in influenza A
viruses, including those that may affect humans or animals. The
emergence of the H5N1 virus, such as clade 2.3.2.1 is one of such
genetic mutations taking place as part of the natural evolution of the
virus. This is not immediate cause for alert but, as with the
emergence of any new strain, reinforces the need for sustained
monitoring of viruses in animal populations so that changes in viruses
circulating in the field are detected at an earliest stage and that
most appropriate disease control strategies are chosen to best protect
animal and public health.

OIE recommends keeping up with active surveillance in bird
populations, encouraging national veterinary services to be prepared
to quickly report and respond to unusual animal disease events that
may represent more serious disease in animals or that may pose
increased risk to humans.

As is the case with human influenza vaccines whose composition needs
to be reviewed every year, avian influenza vaccines need to be
regularly tested to check whether they effectively combat the viruses
circulating in the field. OIE Reference Laboratories and other partner
laboratories are actively involved in ongoing surveillance and
development of good quality vaccines that match the viruses of
concern. The OIE Reference Laboratory in Harbin, China, has developed
a new vaccine seed strain that experimentally protects poultry from
the identified H5N1 virus clade 2.3.2.1. This vaccine, once available
for field use, will be used in countries where H5N1 virus clade
2.3.2.1 has been identified. Registration and manufacturing of a
poultry vaccine with the new seed strain is in progress.

OIE and OFFLU's guidance on early detection and rapid response to
animal disease events prove crucial in the prevention and control of
animal influenzas, with positive implications for human health. OFFLU
is a joint OIE/FAO worldwide network of expertise on avian influenza.
It also provides animal influenza data to the World Health
Organization regularly to assist with the selection of candidate
influenza vaccines for humans.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[It is not surprising that new avian influenza strains may emerge,
particularly in areas where the virus is widely circulating and where
mass vaccination is applied. As indicated in OIE's press release, a
vaccine against the novel H5N1 clade 2.3.2.1 virus, reportedly
identified in Viet Nam and China, is already in the testing phase in
China. It is anticipated that the manufacture and testing of such
vaccines is in accordance with OIE guidelines as stipulated in the
Terrestrial Manual, that its certification and distribution are liable
to State legislation regulated by the State authorities, and that a
close epidemiological follow-up is applied in the field to ensure
optimal results. See also Mod.CP's commentary in ProMED-mail 20110829.2654.

On top of the countries in which H5N1 is still "firmly entrenched" --
Bangladesh, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, and Viet Nam -- 11 other
countries have reported new outbreaks during 2010: Bhutan, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Israel, Japan, South Korea, Laos, Myanmar, Nepal, Romania,
and Russia. During 2011, new outbreaks have been reported, so far, in
Cambodia, Israel, Japan, Mongolia, Myanmar, Palestinian Autonomous
Territories (PAT), and South Africa. In most of those countries the
outbreaks were sporadic, involving single or few wild birds (such as
in Mongolia, Bulgaria) or likely to have been introduced to farms by
wild birds. In 2 countries, the epizootics took considerable
dimensions, involving both domestic and wild birds: Japan (a total of
71 outbreaks) and South Korea (58 outbreaks). In both countries the
outbreaks started in December 2010, continued during the 1st months of
2011, and were eradicated by stamping out without vaccination. The
current outbreak in South Africa, which started in February 2011, has
affected, so far, 34 commercial ostrich farms, without clinical signs.
No human cases have been recorded in those countries or in other
countries where the disease is not endemic. Since January 2011, 49
human cases have been reported to the WHO: Bangladesh (2), Cambodia
(8), Egypt (32), and Indonesia (7). The numbers during parallel
periods in previous years were: 2007: 88, 2008: 44, 2009: 73, and
2010: 48.

The outbreaks recorded elsewhere -- in the Balkans (Bulgaria, Romania)
and the Middle East (Israel, PAT) seem to have been introduced by wild
birds. In the Israel/PAT outbreaks, the disease remained restricted,
was eradicated by stamping out without vaccination, and the causative
agent was found to be closely related to (neighbouring) Egypt's
strains.

It seems that the main concern deserves to be directed at the Asian
continent, with special attention to south and south east Asia. The
H5N1 AI virus remains one of the influenza viruses with pandemic
potential; its control continues to require long term commitments from
countries and strong coordination between national and international
animal and public health authorities.- Mod.AS]
See Also
Avian influenza, human (57): alert 20110829.2654
Avian influenza (46): Viet Nam, vaccine efficacy, RFI 20110527.1628
Avian influenza (41): 6 endemic countries, FAO 20110424.1286
.................................................arn/mj/sh
</body>
