<header id=005470>
Published Date: 2008-12-01 16:00:37 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Prion disease update 2008 (13)
Archive Number: 20081201.3780
</header>
<body id=005470>
PRION DISEASE UPDATE 2008 (13)
****************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

[With the continuing decline in the number of
cases in the human population of variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease -- abbreviated
previously as vCJD or CJD (new var.) in
ProMED-mail -- it has been decided to broaden the
scope of the occasional ProMED-mail updates to
include other prion-related diseases. Data on
vCJD cases and other forms of CJD: sporadic,
iatrogenic, familial, and GSS
(Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease) are
included also when they have some relevance to
the incidence and etiology of vCJD. - Mod.CP]

In this update:
[1] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - monthly
statistics as of Mon 1 Dec 2008
[2] France: Institut de Veille Sanitaire - no update, data from previous month
[3] US National Prion Disease Pathology
Surveillance Center - no update, data from
previous report
[4] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - 16th Annual Report 2008
[5] TSE exposure risk from the milk of small ruminants
[6] Inactivation properties of prions

*******
[1] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - monthly
statistics as of Mon 1 Dec 2008
Date: Mon 1 Dec 2008
Source: UK National CJD Surveillance Unit, monthly statistics [edited]
<http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/figures.htm>


The number of suspect cases of vCJD referred to
the CJD surveillance unit in Edinburgh and the
number of deaths of definite and probable variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease [abbreviated in
ProMED-mail as CJD (new var.) or vCJD], the form
of the disease thought to be linked to BSE
(bovine spongiform encephalopathy), remain
unchanged since the previous monthly report; that
is, the number of definite or probable vCJD cases
(dead and alive) remains 167.

This situation is consistent with the view that
the vCJD outbreak in the UK is in decline. The
1st cases were observed in 1995, and the peak
number of deaths was 28 in the year 2000,
followed by 20 in 2001, 17 in 2002, 18 in 2003, 9
in 2004, 5 in 2005, 5 in 2006, 5 in 2007, and
only one so far (up to the end of November) in
2008.

Totals for all types of CJD cases in the year 2008
----------------------------------------
As of 1 Dec 2008 in the UK, so far there have
been 124 referrals, 71 deaths from sporadic CJD,
5 deaths from iatrogenic CJD, 3 from GSS, 2 from
familial CJD, and one from vCJD.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2] France: Institut de Veille Sanitaire - no update, data from previous month
Date: Thu 30 Oct 2008
Source: IVS - Maladie de Creutzfeldt-Jakob et
maladies apparentees [French, trans. & summ.
Mod.CP, edited]
<http://www.invs.sante.fr/display/?doc=publications/mcj/donnees_mcj.html>


During the period 1992 to 2008, there were 23
cases of vCJD, all now deceased. They occurred
between 1996 and 2007: one case in 1996, one in
2000, one in 2001, 3 in 2002, none in 2003, 2 in
2004, 6 in 2005, 6 in 2006, 3 in 2007, and none
so far in 2008. There were 12 male and 11 female
patients.

Their ages at time of death ranged from 19 to 58
years (mean 39); 6 of the patients resided in the
Ile-de-France [Paris area] and 17 in the
provinces. All the cases were met-met homozygotes
for codon 129 of the prion protein gene. No
special risk factors were evident, which
distinguished these patients from those with
other forms of CJD (sporadic, genetic,
iatrogenic). However, one patient had visited the
UK at regular intervals.

Totals for all types of CJD cases in the year 2008
------------------------------------------
As of 30 Oct 2008 in France, so far in 2008 there
have been 1230 referrals, 56 deaths from sporadic
CJD, 3 deaths from iatrogenic CJD, 7 from
familial CJD, none from GSS, and none from vCJD.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[3] US National Prion Disease Pathology
Surveillance Center - no update, data from
previous report
Date: 30 Sep 2008
Source: US National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center [edited]
<http://www.cjdsurveillance.com/resources-casereport.html>


Cases examined - as of September 2008
-----------------------------------------
During the period 1997 to 2008, 2 cases of vCJD
were reported, both contracted overseas. The 1st
case was recorded in 2004, disease contracted in
the UK, and the 2nd in 2006, disease contracted
in Saudi Arabia.

Totals for all types of CJD cases in the year 2008
------------------------------------------
So far in 2008, there have been 273 referrals,
124 cases of prion disease, including 109 cases
of sporadic CJD, 15 cases of familial CJD, no
cases of iatrogenic CJD and no indigenous cases
of vCJD.

Overall during the period 1997 to 2008, there
have been 2962 referrals, 1663 cases of prion
disease, 1413 cases of sporadic CJD, 244 cases of
familial CJD, 4 cases of iatrogenic CJD and no
indigenous cases of vCJD.

[During 2008 so far, the USA, with approximately
2.5x the combined populations of the UK and
France, has reported fewer cases of sporadic CJD
(109 versus 117). Whether this is due to a
difference in surveillance procedure or actual
disease incidence is unclear at present. - Mod.CP]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[4] UK: National CJD Surveillance Unit - 16th Annual Report 2008
Date: Thu 13 Nov 2008
Source: UK National CJD surveillance Unit, 16th
Annual Report [abbreviated, edited]
<http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk/report16.pdf>


Summary: The national surveillance programme for
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in the UK was
initiated in May 1990. In 1999, the National CJD
Surveillance Unit (NCJDSU) became a WHO
Collaborative Centre for Reference and Research
on the surveillance and epidemiology of human
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs).
In September 2001, the National Care Team was
formed, which currently comprises 2 care
coordinators and a secretary. It is based within
the NCJDSU and was formed in response to concerns
regarding the care of CJD patients.

For the 1st time, the Unit has prepared a
Scientific Report, which is available on the
Unit's website
<http://www.cjd.ed.ac.uk>.
The aim of the Scientific Report is to inform
interested parties of details of the current and
planned future, wide-ranging scientific research
being undertaken by staff at the NCJDSU, in the
context of the Unit's previous research and its
on-going core background surveillance. The
Scientific Report complements this Annual Report,
which provides a description of the
clinico-pathological epidemiology of CJD in the
previous 12 months, reflecting the Unit's core
surveillance work. The NCJDSU Business Plan
provides financial, structural and organizational
information.

The information provided in this 16th Annual
Report continues to indicate that the number of
sporadic cases remains relatively stable (the
data for 2007 may still be incomplete). Detailed
clinical and epidemiological information has been
obtained for the great majority of patients.
There has been a lower number of referrals since
2003, but analysis suggests that much, if not
all, of the decline is due to changes in the
number of referrals who turn out not to be CJD
cases. Although the postmortem rate for patients
with suspected CJD has declined, in line with
general autopsy rates in the UK, it remains high
(around 60 percent). The number of brain
specimens examined in the neuropathology
laboratory for sporadic CJD declined from 32 in
2006 to 23 in 2007. In 1990-2007 mortality rates
from sporadic CJD in England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland were, respectively, 0.90, 1.01,
0.97 and 0.57/million/year. The differences
between these rates are not statistically
significant (p greater than 0.5). The mortality
rates from sporadic CJD in the UK are comparable
to those observed in most other European
countries and elsewhere in the world, including
countries that are free of BSE. The highest and
lowest mortality rates from sporadic CJD were
observed in the South West (SMR=132) and Northern
Ireland (SMR=76), respectively. The variation in
the observed mortality rates between the
different regions within the UK is not
statistically significant (p greater than 0.1).

Up to 31 Dec 2007, there were 163 deaths from
definite or probable variant CJD (vCJD) in the
UK. Of these, 115 were confirmed by
neuropathology. A further 3 probable cases were
alive on 31 Dec 2007. The clinical,
neuropathological and epidemiological features of
these cases of vCJD are remarkably uniform and
consistent with our previous descriptions. Risk
factors for the development of vCJD include age,
residence in the UK and methionine homozygosity
at codon 129 of the prion protein gene; all 146
clinically affected cases of vCJD with available
genetic analysis have been methionine
homozygotes. The incidence of vCJD is higher in
the north of the UK than in the south.

Analysis of the incidence of vCJD onsets and
deaths from January 1994 to December 2007
indicates that a peak has passed. While this is
an encouraging finding, the incidence of vCJD may
increase again, particularly if different genetic
subgroups with longer incubation periods exist.
The identification of disease-related PrP in the
spleen of a clinically unaffected blood recipient
of PRNP-129 MV genotype is not inconsistent with
such an hypothesis. This case, along with the
report of the prevalence of abnormal PrP in the
large study of appendix and tonsil tissues,
suggests the possibility of a greater number of
preclinical or subclinical cases in the
population than might be indicated by the present
numbers of confirmed clinical cases.

The only statistically significant geographic
cluster of vCJD cases in the UK was in
Leicestershire. All geographically associated
cases of vCJD are considered for investigation
according to a protocol which involves the
NCJDSU, colleagues at the HPA, HPS and local
public health physicians.

The activities of the NCJDSU are strengthened by
collaboration with other surveillance projects,
including the Transfusion Medicine Epidemiology
Review and the study of Progressive Intellectual
and Neurological Deterioration in Children. The
collaboration of our colleagues in these projects
is greatly appreciated; the effectiveness of this
collaboration allowed the identification in 2003
of a case of vCJD associated with blood
transfusion and the identification in 2004 of
PrPres in the spleen of a recipient of blood
donated by someone incubating vCJD. In 2006, a
further 2 cases of vCJD associated with blood
transfusion were identified.

The success of the National CJD Surveillance Unit
continues to depend on the extraordinary level of
cooperation from the neuroscience community and
other medical and paramedical staff throughout
the UK. Ongoing support is provided by the
Infectious Diseases Epidemiology Unit, London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. We are
also particularly grateful to the relatives of
patients for their collaboration.

[Sub-sections of the report highlighted by Terry
S. Singeltary for attention include the following
extracts from the Laboratory Activities Section.]

Molecular Genetics - Familial CJD
--------------------------------------
91 cases of familial CJD (excluding cases of GSS)
have been identified since 1970 by the NCJDSU
(these data are incomplete, as formal
investigation of familial CJD in the UK is
undertaken by the National Prion Clinic in
London). Of the 91 cases, 82 were resident in
England, 7 were resident in Wales and 2 were
resident in Northern Ireland. 18 cases were still
alive as of 31 Dec 2007. 47 of the cases had
insertions in the coding region of the PrP gene;
23 carried the mutation at codon 200 (Glu-Lys), 5
at codon 178 (Asp-Asn, with methionine at codon
129, ie FFI), 2 at codon 178 (MV), 2 at codon 210
(Val-Ile), one at codon D167G and one at codon
V163STOP. The remaining 10 were identified as
familial on the basis of relatives known to have
had CJD. The mean age at death was 55 years
(range 31-77 years).

Molecular genetics - Codon 129 distribution in sporadic CJD
-------------------------------------------
The distribution of codon 129 genotypes in
sporadic CJD has been analysed since the
inception of the Unit in 1990. The overall
distribution of codon 129 genotypes in sporadic
CJD is 64 percent MM, 18 percent MV, 18 percent
VV. There appears to be evidence (p=3D0.010) of a
change in the codon 129 distribution in sporadic
CJD between the periods 1990-1995 and 1996-2007.
The explanation for this remains unclear and is
being investigated further. It should be noted
that not all cases are genotyped (data available
on 64 percent), and, therefore, changes in codon
129 distribution may reflect changes in the way
in which cases are selected for analysis.
Genotype distribution for the normal population
is MM 39 percent, MV 50 percent, vv 11 percent.

Molecular genetics - Codon 129 distribution in vCJD
-----------------------------------------
In contrast to the above, all clinical cases for
whom genetic data are available (n=146, 88
percent) were methionine homozygotes at codon 129
of the PrP gene.

--
Communicated by:
Terry S. Singeltary <flounder9@verizon.net>

[The Laboratories Activities Section of the
report also presents the results of an analysis
of CSF 14-3-3 and other brain specific proteins.
Of 361 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples obtained
from referral patients from January 2007 to
December 2007, 295 were from patients residing in
the United Kingdom, and 66 were from patients
from elsewhere. All 58 patients with a diagnosis
of definite, probable or possible CJD were CSF
14-3-3 protein positive, whereas of the 208 CSF
samples sent from referral patients who did not
have enough signs and symptoms of CJD, 34 had a
positive CSF 14-3-3 protein. These data suggest
that presence of CSF 14-3-3 protein is an
invariant, but not unique characteristic of CJD.

For further details, the reader is referred to
the full report, which includes sections on:
Clinical Surveillance, Case-Control Study,
Laboratory Activities, National Care Team
Activities, and Publications. This document
provides an up-to-date statement of current
knowledge of human transmissible neuropathies. -
Mod.CP]

******
[5] TSE exposure risk from the milk of small ruminants
Date: Wed 22 Oct 2008
Source: European Food Safety Authority [edited]
http://www.efsa.europa.eu/cs/BlobServer/Scientific_Opinion/biohaz_op_ej849_tse_infectivity_summary_en,0.pdf?ssbinary=true


Human and animal exposure risk related to
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs)
from milk and milk products derived from small
ruminants (Scientific opinion of the Panel on
Biological Hazards)
-----------------------------------------------
Summary: Following a request from the European
Commission (EC), the Panel on Biological Hazards
(BIOHAZ) was asked to deliver a scientific
opinion on the human and animal exposure risk
related to Transmissible Spongiform
Encephalopathies (TSEs) from milk and milk
products derived from small ruminants.

In a recent scientific article from Konold et
al., published on 8 Apr 2008 in BMC Veterinary
Research, on "Evidence of scrapie transmission
via milk," it is concluded that: "there is a
risk of the transmission of scrapie from ewe to
lamb via milk or colostrum. Infection of lambs
via milk may result in shedding of the infectious
agent into the environment..."

The BIOHAZ Panel was invited to provide an
opinion on the conclusions from the article of
Konold et al. (2008), and if considered necessary
based on any additional available scientific
data, to update the current risk assessments on
the human and animal exposure related to
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs)
from milk and milk products derived from small
ruminants.

When approaching the mandate, the BIOHAZ Panel
did not consider the zoonotic potential of small
ruminant TSE agents. This aspect is considered in
detail in previous EFSA documents. The TSE agents
considered in the assessment were Classical
scrapie, Atypical scrapie and Bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE). Moreover, the assessment
was performed employing mainly data from TSE in
sheep, which were considered valid also for TSE
in goats due to the lack of more specific data in
that species.

The Panel considered valid the conclusion of the
article of Konold et al. (2008). Expanding the
article of Konold et al. (2008), another study
from Lacroux et al. (2008) independently
demonstrated that Classical scrapie can be
transmitted from susceptible ewe to transgenic
mice via colostrum and milk. It was emphasized
that both studies were designed to achieve the
highest possibility of transmission success and
that this could differ from the field situation.
The panel noted that in both studies, milk from
asymptomatic donor ewes transmitted disease,
indicating that clinically healthy, Classical
scrapie-incubating sheep may shed the causal
agents of these TSEs in milk. Moreover, the level
of prion infectivity in small ruminant milk could
become higher during the course of mastitis, but
the somatic cell count was considered as an
unreliable indicator for presence or absence of
TSE infectivity in small ruminant milk.

The panel concluded that the use of milk and milk
products from a flock with Classical scrapie may
carry a TSE exposure risk for humans and animals.
Furthermore, the use of milk and milk products
from the general small ruminant population may
carry a TSE exposure risk for humans and animals
due to the presence of undetected affected flocks
in that population. However, because of the
difference in scrapie prevalence between affected
flocks and the general small ruminant population,
the risk of exposure for humans and animals
associated with milk and milk products from the
general small ruminant population will be lower
than the risk from detected scrapie affected
flocks.

The panel also concluded that the exposure to a
Classical scrapie agent via milk of an infected
animal can be estimated to be 4 to 5 logs10 lower
than the infectivity found in the same w8 of
brainstem from a terminally affected animal, and
2 to 3 logs10 lower the than infectivity found in
the same w8 of lymphoid tissues from an animal
incubating scrapie or from a clinically affected
animal.

The BIOHAZ panel further noted that no
information is available concerning the presence
of infectivity or PrPSc in colostrum or milk from
small ruminants affected by Atypical scrapie or
BSE. However, the panel emphasized that due to
the early and progressive peripheral tissue
dissemination of the BSE agent in experimentally
infected susceptible sheep, the occurrence of
infectivity in colostrum and milk of BSE infected
susceptible small ruminants would be likely. On
the other hand, the apparent restricted
dissemination of the agent of Atypical scrapie in
affected individuals could limit its
transmissibility through milk.

As there is large variation between MS [member
states?] in prevalence of scrapie and production
of small ruminant milk, the human and animal
exposure associated with small ruminant dairy
products varies greatly between MS.

The panel further concluded that breeding of
sheep for relative resistance to Classical
scrapie according to the previous EFSA [European
Food Safety Authority] opinion can be expected to
reduce human and animal exposure associated with
small ruminant dairy products.

The panel recommended to perform research in
order to characterize the exposure risk via milk,
especially in Atypical scrapie and BSE in small
ruminants, to investigate on the stability of
prion infectivity in milk during further
processing, and to obtain more data to confirm
and expand the preliminary information available
on the quantitation of infectivity levels in
small ruminant milk fractions.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

******
[6] Inactivation properties of prions
Date: Fri 14 Nov 2008
Source: PLoS Pathogens, 4 (11) [edited]
<http://www.plospathogens.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.ppat.1000206>

[The following is the abstract and authors'
summary of a paper published in the 14 Nov 2008
issue of PLoS Pathogens entitled: "Resistance of
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) Prions to
Inactivation;" by Kurt Giles, David V. Glidden,
Robyn Beckwith, Rose Seoanes, David Peretz,
Stephen J. DeArmond and Stanley B. Prusiner.]

Abstract:
--------
Distinct prion strains often exhibit different
incubation periods and patterns of
neuropathological lesions. Strain characteristics
are generally retained upon intraspecies
transmission but may change on transmission to
another species. We investigated the inactivation
of 2 related prion strains: BSE prions from
cattle and mouse-passaged BSE prions, termed
301V. Inactivation was manipulated by exposure to
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), variations in pH,
and different temperatures. Infectivity was
measured using transgenic mouse lines that are
highly susceptible to either BSE or 301V prions.
Bioassays demonstrated that BSE prions are up to
1000-fold more resistant to inactivation than
301V prions, while Western immunoblotting showed
that short acidic SDS treatments reduced
protease-resistant PrPSc from BSE prions and 301V
prions at similar rates. Our findings argue that
despite being derived from BSE prions, mouse 301V
prions are not necessarily a reliable model for
cattle BSE prions. Extending these comparisons to
human sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and
hamster Sc237 prions, we found that BSE prions
were 10- and 106-fold more resistant to
inactivation, respectively. Our studies contend
that any prion inactivation procedures must be
validated by bioassay against the prion strain
for which they are intended to be used.

Author Summary:
----------------
"Mad cow" disease, formally known as bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), belongs to a
family of diseases affecting humans and a number
of commercially important animal species. These
diseases are not spread by bacteria or viruses,
but by infectious proteins, termed "prions."
Prions are known to be very difficult to
inactivate, but little is known about the
relative difficulty of inactivation for prions
from different species. Here, we studied the
inactivation of BSE prions and compared it to the
inactivation of prions from humans, mice, and
hamsters. We used highly sensitive, genetically
engineered mouse models to detect low levels of
infectivity. We then quantified the levels of
inactivation for a range of treatments and
calculated differences between prions from
different species. We found that naturally
occurring BSE prions can be up to one million
times more difficult to inactivate than the most
commonly used hamster prions. BSE prions were
also 1000 times more difficult to inactivate than
a mouse prion that was thought to be a surrogate
for BSE prions. This study demonstrates that
prion inactivation procedures need to be
validated directly against the prion strains for
which they are intended to be used.

--
Communicated by:
Terry S. Singeltary <flounder9@verizon.net>
See Also
Prion disease update 2008 (12) 20081103.345
Prion disease update 2008 (11) 20081006.3159
vCJD, mother & son - Spain: (Leon) 20080926.3051
Prion disease update 2008 (10) 20080902.2742
Prion disease update 2008 (09) 20080805.2402
Prion disease update 2008 (08) 20080707.2058
Prion disease update 2008 (07) 20080604.1793
Prion disease update 2008 (06) 20080506.1555
vCJD - Spain: susp. 20080410.1311
Prion disease update 2008 (05) 20080408.1285
Prion disease update 2008 (04) 20080303.0878
Prion disease update 2008 (03) 20080204.0455
Prion disease update 2008 (02) 20080107.0087
Prion disease update 2008 (01): correction 20080104.0046
Prion disease update 2008 (01) 20080102.0014
2007
----
Prion disease update 2007 (08) 20071205.3923
Prion disease update 2007 (07) 20071105.3602
Prion disease update 2007 (06) 20071003.3269
Prion disease update 2007 (05) 20070901.2879
Prion disease update 2007 (04) 20070806.2560
Prion disease update 2007 (03) 20070702.2112
Prion disease update 2007 (02) 20070604.1812
Prion disease update 2007 20070514.1542
CJD (new var.) update 2007 (05) 20070403.1130
CJD (new var.) update 2007 (04) 20070305.0780
CJD (new var.) update 2007 (03) 20070205.0455
CJD (new var.) update 2007 (02): South Korea, susp 20070115.0199
2006
----
CJD (new var.), blood transfusion risk 20061208.3468
CJD, transmission risk - Canada (ON) 20061207.3457
CJD (new var.) update 2006 (12) 20061205.3431
CJD (new var.) update 2006 (11) 20061106.3190
CJD (new var.) update 2006 (10) 20061002.2820
CJD (new var.) - Netherlands: 2nd case 20060623.1741
CJD (new var.) - UK: 3rd transfusion-related case 20060209.0432
CJD (new var.) update 2006 (02) 20060206.0386
CJD (new var.) update 2006 20060111.0101
2005
----
CJD (new var.) update 2005 (12) 20051209.3547
CJD (new var.) update 2005 (11) 20051108.3270
CJD (new var.) update 2005 (10) 20051006.2916
CJD (new var.) update 2005 (02) 20050211.0467
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2005 (01) 20050111.0095
2004
----
CJD, genetic susceptibility 20041112.3064
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2004 (14) 20041206.3242
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2004 (10) 20040909.2518
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2004 (02) 20040202.0400
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2004 (01) 20040106.0064
CJD (new var.) - France: 8th case 20041022.2864
CJD (new var.) - France: 9th case 20041123.3138
CJD (new var.), blood supply - UK 20040318.0758
CJD (new var.), carrier frequency study - UK 20040521.1365
2003
----
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2003 (13) 20031216.3072
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 2003 (01) 20030108.0057
2002
----
CJD (new var.) - UK: update Dec 2002 20021207.5997
CJD (new var.) - UK: update Jan 2002 20020111.3223
2001
----
CJD (new var.), incidence & trends - UK (02) 20011124.2875
CJD (new var.), incidence & trends - UK 20011115.2816
CJD (new var.) - UK: reassessment 20011029.2671
CJD (new var.) - UK: update Oct 2001 20011005.2419
CJD (new var.) - UK: regional variation (02) 20010907.2145
CJD (new var.) - UK: update Sep 2001 20010906.2134
CJD (new var.) - UK: update Aug 2001 20010808.1872
CJD (new var.) - UK: 9th Annual Report 20010628.1231
CJD (new var.) - UK: update June 2001 20010622.1188
CJD (new var.) - UK: update 3 Jan 2001 20010104.0025
....................................................cp/arn/msp/lm


*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
