<header id=031975>
Published Date: 2009-08-06 17:00:06 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (25): Australia, UK, updates
Archive Number: 20090806.2784
</header>
<body id=031975>
INFLUENZA PANDEMIC (H1N1) 2009 (25): AUSTRALIA AND UNITED KINGDOM, UPDATES
**************************************************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Thu 6 Aug 2009
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 14, Issue 31, 6 Aug 2009 [edited]
<http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19288>


Interim analysis of pandemic influenza (H1N1)
2009 in Australia: surveillance trends, age of
infection and effectiveness of seasonal vaccination

Between May and September each year, influenza
sentinel surveillance is conducted in general
practices in Melbourne and the state of Victoria
in southern Australia. We describe the 1st 11
weeks of sentinel surveillance in 2009 (weeks
18-28), during which time pandemic influenza
(H1N1) 2009 virus became established, and
investigate the protective effect of seasonal
influenza vaccine against laboratory-confirmed
infection caused by the pandemic virus. At the
time of reporting, the peak influenza-like
illness (ILI) activity in 2009 had been reached
and was similar to the peak recorded in 2007 but
below the peak of 2003. The proportion of cases
positive for any influenza virus increased from 6
percent in the 1st week of surveillance (week 18)
to 59 percent by week 28, during which time the
proportion of influenza viruses detected as
pandemic influenza increased from zero to 95
percent, with at least 91 percent of all
influenza viruses confirmed as pandemic influenza
by the 8th week of surveillance (week 25). The
median age of all 223 patients with pandemic
influenza for whom age was known was 21 years
(range 2-63 years) compared with the median age
of 53 patients with seasonal H1N1 influenza in
2007 or 2008 of 23 years (range 1-75 years).
There was no evidence of significant protection
from seasonal vaccine against pandemic influenza
virus infection in any age group.

Introduction
------------
Australia reported its 1st case of pandemic
influenza (H1N1) 2009 on 8 May 2009 in a
traveller returned from the United States [1]. 10
days later the state of Victoria in southern
Australia reported its 1st 3 cases, in 3 brothers
from one family, also recently returned from the
United States [2]. Victoria has used an existing
sentinel general practice network, established
with laboratory support in 1998 [3], to monitor
the pandemic. Sentinel monitoring is designed to
overcome the potential testing biases that arise
from monitoring all diagnosed cases, including
those identified from outbreaks and contact
tracing. During the current pandemic, sentinel
surveillance general practitioners have been
encouraged to test those patients who satisfied
the case definition of fever (reported or
observed), cough and fatigue/malaise [4], as they
have done in previous years [5-10].

We have previously demonstrated the feasibility
of estimating influenza vaccine effectiveness
(VE) using a case control study of patients
tested for influenza as a component of sentinel
surveillance [11]. We now aim to describe the 1st
11 weeks, from 27 Apr 2009 to 12 Jul 2009 (weeks
18Â­28), of sentinel surveillance in Victoria in
2009, during which time pandemic influenza (H1N1)
2009 virus became established. We compare
influenza-like illness (ILI) in 2009 with
previous seasons and compare our surveillance
system with ILI surveillance using the novel
Google Flu Trends. We investigate the protective
effect of seasonal influenza vaccine against
medically attended ILI due to
laboratory-confirmed infection caused by the pandemic virus in this period.

Methods
-------
The Victorian sentinel general practice network
Victoria is a southern Australian state with a
temperate climate. The influenza season occurs in
winter and often extends into the early months of
spring. Between May and September each year,
sentinel surveillance is conducted in general
practices scattered throughout Melbourne and
regional Victoria. Victoria's population is more
than 5 million, with 3.9 million people living in
the state capital, Melbourne. For each season,
participating general practitioners (GPs) report
weekly on the total number of consultations and
any patients presenting with ILI, defined as
fever (reported or observed), cough and fatigue/malaise [4].

Laboratory-confirmed influenza has been a
gazetted notifiable disease in Victoria since
2001. Because of the legal requirement for the
laboratory to notify positive cases, formal
ethics approval is not required for the
surveillance program. However written consent is
obtained from sentinel patients, indicating that
aggregate anonymous data will be used for
surveillance purposes and influenza positive
results will be notified to the state government
Department of Human Services, Victoria. After
consent is obtained GPs collect data on the age,
sex, symptoms and vaccination status (recording
the date of administering the vaccine) of the
sentinel patients. GPs collect a combined nose
and throat swab from consenting patients. The
swab is couriered to the Victorian Infectious
Diseases Reference Laboratory (VIDRL), a WHO
National Influenza Centre, for laboratory
testing. In 2009 sentinel surveillance commenced
on 27 Apr 2009 (week 18), with a network of 87 sentinel GPs, 60 in Melbour!
ne and 27 in regional Victoria. Optional online
data entry was introduced and we continued to use
surveillance data from the Melbourne Medical
Deputising Service (MMDS) [12]. We compared
publicly available ILI data from the Google website,
<http://www.google.org/flutrends/intl/en_au/>
expressed as the Google search ratio, with our
surveillance data, expressed as ILI consultations per 1000 consultations.

We used data from all surveillance sources to
describe the 1st 11 weeks of the influenza season
and compared features of the 2009 season with
previous influenza seasons. Seasonal thresholds
were based on the proportion of ILI cases per
1000 consultations. Baseline activity, normal
seasonal and higher than expected seasonal
activity were defined as below 2.5, between 2.5
and <15, and between 15 and <35 per 1000
consultations, respectively. According to these
thresholds, 'epidemic influenza activity' was
defined by proportions at or above 35 cases per 1000 consultations [13].


Laboratory testing
------------------
Specimens were tested in the Viral Identification
Laboratory at the Victorian Infectious Diseases
Reference Laboratory (VIDRL). Viral RNA was
extracted and tested for all influenza types and
specific subtypes using a series of in-house
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays directed
at matrix gene sequences of influenza A and B.
Any sample positive for influenza virus A was
subtyped as influenza A(H1N1), influenza A(H3N2)
or pandemic influenza A(H1N1) using specific PCR
assays directed at hemagglutinin gene sequences.
Any positive samples were referred to the World
Health Organization Collaborating Centre for
Influenza Reference and Research where an attempt
to culture an isolate was made.

Estimating influenza vaccine effectiveness
------------------------------------------
Analysis was restricted to patients who presented
for medical attention to any of the sentinel
surveillance practices and who subsequently had a
swab taken for the identification of influenza
virus by real-time PCR. Patients whose PCR tests
were inhibited were excluded from the analysis,
as were patients whose vaccine status or age was
unknown, and patients for whom subtyping data
were not available. We used a case control design
to estimate VE, where case and control status
were not defined at the time of recruitment.
Counting all patients from whose swabs pandemic
(H1N1) 2009 influenza virus was detected as cases
and all patients whose swabs were negative for
influenza as controls, we estimated unadjusted VE
( percent) = (1-OR) x 100, where OR, the odds
ratio, was the odds of being a vaccinated case
divided by the odds of being a vaccinated
control. We performed age-stratified analyses and
adjusted for age by logistic regression using the
following age groups: 0-4 years, 5-1!
9 years, 20-49 years, 50-64 years and 65 years
and above. The southern hemisphere seasonal
vaccine contained A/Brisbane/59/2007-like virus as the H1N1 component.

Results
-------
The 2009 influenza season
-------------------------
The influenza season of 2009 appeared to be
already established when surveillance commenced
at the end of April, with ILI activity above the
threshold designated as normal seasonal activity.
ILI activity increased quickly, crossing the
threshold designated as higher than normal
activity in the week commencing 8 June. Activity
appeared to peak in week 26, and decreased again
almost to the threshold of normal seasonal
activity by the end of week 27. At the time of
reporting the peak ILI activity in 2009 was
similar to the peak recorded in 2007 (in week 34)
but below the peak of 2003, also recorded in week 34.

The proportion of cases positive for any
influenza virus increased from 6 percent in the
1st week of surveillance to 59 percent by week
28, by which time the 1st 223 cases of pandemic
H1N1 influenza had been detected. During this
same period the proportion of influenza viruses
detected as pandemic influenza increased from
zero to 95 percent, with at least 91 percent of
all influenza viruses confirmed as pandemic
influenza by the 8th week of surveillance (week
25) [Datetabulated in the original text].
Comparison of ILI surveillance using sentinel
practices and the MMDS with Google Flu Trends
showed remarkable correlation between all 3
systems, with the comparison shown for
surveillance extended to week 31, ending 2 August
[data illustrated by a figure in the original text].

Although males comprised 56 percent of the sample
of sentinel patients, pandemic influenza virus
was detected in equal proportions of males and
females (37.7 percent vs 36.8 percent). The
median age of infection of all 221 patients with
pandemic influenza for whom age was known was 21
years (range 2-63 years) compared with the median
age of infection of 53 patients with seasonal
H1N1 infection in 2007 or 2008 of 23 years (range
1-75 years). By contrast the median age of
infection of patients with seasonal H3N2 was 28
years in 2007 (n=147) and 33 years in 2008
(n=43). Although the proportion of patients in
whom pandemic H1N1 influenza was detected was
higher in 2009 than the proportion in whom
seasonal H1N1 influenza was detected in 2007 or
2008 (37 percent versus 6 percent, respectively),
there was no significant difference by age group
in the proportion of seasonal H1N1 infection
detected in 2007 or 2008 compared with the
proportion of pandemic H1N1 infection detected in 2009!
(Table 2, Fisher's exact p=0.17). However the
proportion of the 5-19 year old age group with
seasonal or pandemic influenza H1N1 was higher
than the proportion of this age group in the
population [Data tabulated in the original text].

Vaccine effectiveness
---------------------
By week 28, sentinel practitioners had seen 81
992 patients, had notified 982 (1.2 percent) of
these patients with ILI and taken nose and throat
swabs from 682 (69 percent) of them. Influenza
virus was detected in 297/682 (44 percent)
patients, and in 223/297 (75 percent) patients
pandemic influenza (H1N1) 2009 was detected.
After exclusion of patients for whom definitive
subtyping is pending (n=69), patients for whom
age was unknown (n=10), patients with unknown
vaccination status (n=22) and patients with
influenza due to a non-pandemic subtype (n=6),
577 patients were available for analysis, of whom
212 (37 percent) had pandemic influenza virus
detected and the remainder had no virus detected.
These patients were used for the estimates of VE.

Twenty per cent of patients were vaccinated
against influenza but, as expected, the
proportion of patients differed significantly by
age group, with people aged at least 50 years
more likely to have been vaccinated (p<0.001,
[Data tabulated in the original text]. Pandemic
influenza virus was detected in 37 percent of all
patients, again with significant differences by
age group (p<0.001). People aged 5-19 years were
most likely to have influenza virus detected
(80/158, 51 percent), compared with none of 21
patients aged at least 65 years and 7/35 (20 percent) patients aged 0-4 years.

There was no evidence of significant protection
from seasonal vaccine against pandemic influenza
virus infection in any age group, with point
estimates ranging from 39 percent in persons aged
less than 5 years to -65 percent (OR = 1.65) in
persons aged 50-64 years. Age adjusted VE was 3
percent (95 percent CI -56 to 40) for all
patients, 10 percent (95 percent CI -54 to 48) in
patients aged 5-49 years and 1 percent (95
percent CI -70 to 42) in patients aged 20-64. In
patients younger than 50 years, VE was 12 percent
(95 percent CI -48 to 48) and VE was -65 percent
(95 percent CI -467 to 52) in patients aged 50
years or older. The latter estimate was based
only on patients aged 50-64 years, as pandemic
influenza was not detected in the group of
patients aged 65 years and older. The oldest
patient in whom pandemic influenza was detected was aged 63 years.

We further restricted our analysis to weeks 25-28
inclusive, when pandemic influenza comprised at
least 90 percent of all influenza detections, and
the age groups 5-49 years, where most infections
occurred. This period accounted for 352 patients
with known age and vaccination status (61 percent
of all comparable patients) and 201 cases (95
percent of all comparable cases). For all ages in
this 4-week period, age-adjusted VE was 24
percent (95 percent CI Â­37 to 58) and, for ages
5-49 years, VE was 20 percent (95 percent CI Â­52 to 48).

Discussion
----------
The seasonal pattern of ILI in Victoria between
27 Apr 2009 and 12 Jul 2009 was similar comparing
data from sentinel general practices and the
Melbourne Medical Deputising Service (MMDS). Both
surveillance systems peaked in the same week,
although the peak from the MMDS was higher. We
have shown these 2 surveillance systems can be
used interchangeably to monitor ILI in the
community but, as seen in the 1st 11 weeks of
surveillance in 2009, the correlation between the
2 systems is better for lower ILI activity [14].
These 2 systems also showed remarkable
concordance with Google Flu Trends. Google used
historical data from the Victorian sentinel
surveillance system from 2006-2008 to validate
its Australian version of Flu Trends
<http://blog.google.org/2009/06/google-flu-trends-for-australia-and-new.html>
so that retrospective similarity of data is
expected. The prospective similarity is
interesting. Unfortunately there is no detailed
published information on the approach used by
Google for ILI surveillance in the southern
hemisphere, preventing a more detailed comparison.

With complete subtyping, influenza in sentinel
patients was shown to be exclusively due to
pandemic influenza in weeks 30 and 31 date available from:
<http://www.vidrl.org.au/surveillance/flu%20reports/flu_idx.html>.
However, considering only patients for whom
subtyping data were complete in previous weeks
when these patients comprised at least 90 percent
of all influenza detections, influenza in these
sentinel patients was entirely due to pandemic influenza from week 25.

We have previously suggested the median age of
patients infected with influenza A(H1N1) was
similar for patients infected with seasonal and
pandemic influenza H1N1 strains [15, 16] and the
surveillance data presented here confirm these
original observations. Infections with influenza
A(H3N2) tend to occur in older people [15, 17]
and comparisons of the age of infection with
pandemic H1N1 influenza with the age of infection
of all seasonal influenza may be misleading if
previous seasons were dominated by influenza
A(H3N2). A younger median age of infection with
pandemic H1N1 influenza is likely to reflect the
age of infection with influenza A(H1N1) viruses.
We detected no sentinel patients with pandemic
influenza over the age of 63 years, consistent
with some protection afforded to older people as
demonstrated by the detection of cross-reacting
antibodies to the pandemic H1N1 virus in people aged 60 years and above [18].

We found no evidence of protection against
medically attended laboratory-confirmed pandemic
influenza from receipt of the seasonal vaccine in
age-stratified or age-adjusted analyses. However,
we do not collect data on co-morbidities and
could not adjust for potential confounders, other
than age. The ILI case control observational
study design has limitations, some of which may
bias the VE estimate towards the null. Sampling
of patients is not systematic and the sampling
proportion increased to 69 percent in 2009 from
40 percent in the 5 influenza seasons from 2003
to 2007 [11]. Seasonal influenza infection may be
asymptomatic or afebrile [19] and the same is no
doubt true for infection with pandemic H1N1
influenza. Sentinel patients therefore represent
the mid-range of the influenza morbidity
spectrum, although this is likely to be true for
both seasonal and pandemic infections. Given the
high level of community concern, patients may
have been more likely to attend their general
practitioner with an ILI in 2009, compared with
previous seasons, and GPs may have been more
likely to swab patients. However the proportion
of 44 percent of sentinel patients positive for
influenza in the 1st 11 weeks of surveillance in
2009 is not significantly different to the
proportion of 42 percent positive in the 5
influenza seasons between 2003 and 2007 [11].

Because of the high workload in the early weeks
of the pandemic in Victoria, not all influenza
positive specimens have been definitively
subtyped. However, the distribution of
vaccination status and pandemic influenza
infection in the weeks where subtyping is
incomplete would need to be remarkably different
to the distribution in the weeks with almost
complete data for this lack of data to bias our
estimate of VE. Because of low case numbers in
the early weeks, we did not adjust for week of
presentation in the interim analysis, but
performed an analysis restricted to the 4 weeks
when subtyping data were almost complete and in
which pandemic influenza comprised at least 90
percent of all influenza detections. There was no
significant difference in VE estimates comparing
these 4 weeks with the entire period. We did not
adjust for time between symptom onset and date of
specimen collection since GPs are instructed to
collect a specimen only within 4 days of symptom onset.

While there are potential limitations with
interim analyses of VE from observational studies
using routinely collected data, the results
reported here, showing no protection from
seasonal vaccine against laboratory confirmed
medically attended infection due to pandemic
influenza (H1N1) 2009, are not unexpected.

[Byline: H Kelly and K Grant
At: Epidemiology Unit, Victorian Infectious
Diseases Reference Laboratory, Melbourne, Australia]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The 16 references can be viewed by accessing the original text.

It is disappointing to learn that there is no
evidence to suggest that prior seasonal influenza
vaccination has had an ameliorating effect. - Mod.CP]

******
[2]
Date: Thu 6 Aug 2009
Source: BBC News [edited]
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/8188027.stm>


Big drop in new swine flu cases
-------------------------------
The number of new cases of H1N1 swine flu in
England and Scotland has fallen significantly,
latest figures show. England recorded an
estimated 30 000 cases last week, compared with
110 000 the week before. In Scotland estimated numbers fell from 1500 to 1050.

The Health Protection Agency said there was no
sign that the virus was mutating into a more
lethal form, or developing resistance to drugs.
The number of swine flu-related deaths in England
now stands at 36. 4 people have died in Scotland.
In total, 530 patients were admitted to hospital
in England last week, down on the previous week's
total of 793. Wales is also reporting falling but
widespread levels of "influenza like illness"
with an estimated 2670 new cases compared with
4410 last week. Cases in Northern Ireland seem to
have risen with 83 new cases compared with 10 the week before.

Officials have always predicted rates of
infection would fall away in the summer before a
large surge in the autumn to coincide with the
normal flu season. England's Chief Medical
Officer, Professor Sir Liam Donaldson, said it
was very difficult to predict when a 2nd wave
would hit. "It's guesswork really -- we would
anticipate that when the schools go back, at some
point after that it would rise. "We can't be
complacent about this, we have to continue
planning, we have to be ready for what happens in
the autumn. He added that the national pandemic
flu service, launched 2 weeks ago to take the
pressure off GPs, was "flexible enough" to scale
up or down dependent on levels of swine flu.

Figures from the Department of Health suggest
3-quarters of the general public are not very or
not at all worried about swine flu. Awareness is
high, with 37 percent saying they heard a great
deal about swine flu in the media in the past
week. Experts are currently looking at what is
happening in the southern hemisphere [see
preceding post - Mod.CP] to help predict what
could happen in the UK over the winter months.

In the past week deaths in Argentina from swine
flu have risen sharply and currently stand at 337
[see comment below - Mod.CP]. There are also
indications that Mexico may be now seeing a 2nd wave of cases.

Vaccine
-------
Meanwhile, the World Health Organization (WHO)
has announced that the 1st swine flu vaccines are
likely to be licensed for use in the general
population in September 2009. Several
manufacturers have produced initial batches of a
H1N1 vaccine and some clinical trials are already
underway. WHO director of vaccine research Dr
Marie-Paule Kieny also sought to calm fears about
safety of new vaccines. She said the vaccines
were based on "old and proven technology." Some
experts have raised concerns about the lack of
safety data on flu vaccines in these groups. In
particular a very rare neurological condition
called Guillain-Barre syndrome, which affected
500 people during a US vaccine programme against
swine flu in 1976. Dr Kieny said much was known
about flu vaccines in these groups from seasonal
vaccines given every winter and added that
regulatory agencies would be monitoring for any
signs of adverse reaction. "The quality controls
on today's vaccine are much better than they were 30 years ago," she added.

Regulators in the US and Europe have special
plans in place to fast-track swine flu vaccines,
some of which are based on conventional seasonal
flu vaccines and some which use newer technology.
It comes as drug company, Baxter, has announced
the production of the 1st commercial batches of
its swine flu vaccine Celvapan. The vaccine has
been grown using cell culture, a much faster
method than the traditional way of growing it in
eggs. Baxter is one of 2 companies contracted to
provide pandemic flu vaccine to the UK, the other
being GlaxoSmithKline, and both plan to start
clinical trials this month. One key part of the
trials is to work out whether people need one or
2 doses of the vaccine. Ministers have repeatedly
said they expect to have enough doses for half
the UK population by the end of the year.

The BBC report concludes with a graph of GP
consultation rates for influenza-like illness
(ILI) across the UK illustrating visually the current dramatic fall in ILI.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail


[It is clear from the above 2 reports and others
that the the pandemic (H1N1) 2009 outbreak is
following different courses in different countries.

Argentina has now become one of the most badly
affected countries, 2nd only to the USA in terms
of mortality. Although ProMED-mail is not a
repository for sequence data, we are passing on
the following information from Dr.Gustavo
Palacios (Center for Infection and Immunity,
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University)

"Recently we had completed sequencing of 2
genomes of H1N1 strains obtained in Argentina
[see: Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (16):
Argentina, sequencing 20090723.2604]. Given
concerns about public release of the sequences,
and following the mandate of the WHO to publish
sequences ASAP; we are requesting ProMED-mail to
inform the community where these sequences are
and others will available (in the form of a draft
sequence). Up to date, the website lists aprox 10
complete genome sequences. The 1st 2 sequences
can be accessed via the CII website at
<http://www.cii.columbia.edu>. By communicating
this information on the Web we want to encourage
other researchers to look at the data. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (24): global update 20090805.2766
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (23): (China,
Taiwan), co-circ. H3N2 20090802.2713
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (22): Australia (NSW), swine 20090801.2698
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (21): vaccine prioriities 20090730.2669
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (20): Peru, 33
percent asymptomatic 20090730.2668
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (19): Viet Nam, H1N1, H5N1 (susp) 20090728.2655
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (18): 1st case? 20090725.2631
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (17): neurologic complications 20090723.2606
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (16): Argentina, sequencing 20090723.2604
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (15): Canada (AB) swine workers 20090723.2603
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (14): case count 20090722.2599
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (13): comments 20090722.2598
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (12): antivirals 20090722.2597
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (11): vaccine issues 20090722.2595
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (10): vaccine 20090720.2577
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (09): UK, pig stockman 20090718.2560
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (08): pandemic origins 20090718.2559
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (07): Argentina, swine, alert 20090718.2557
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (06): case reporting 20090717.2553
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (05): vaccine 20090716.2540
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (04): pandemic origins 20090715.2527
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (03): vaccine 20090713.2505
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (02): obesity risk factor 20090711.2482
Influenza pandemic (H1N1) 2009 - Viet Nam: patient data 20090708.2450
....................cp/ejp/dk

*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
