<header id=000810>
Published Date: 2011-09-09 17:51:53 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Malaria - Guyana
Archive Number: 20110909.2753
</header>
<body id=000810>
MALARIA - GUYANA
****************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

******
[1]
Date: Fri 9 Sep 2011
Source: The Medical News [edited]
http://www.news-medical.net/news/20110908/Guyana-coast-at-risk-of-malaria-resurgence-as-climate-change-brings-warmer-temperatures-more-rainfall.aspx



Guyana coast at risk of malaria resurgence
------------------------------------------
Guyana is battling to prevent the spread of malaria as climate change
brings higher temperatures and more rainfall, threatening to push the
disease back into densely populated coastal regions," AlertNet
reports.

The majority of malaria cases occur in the northwest of the small
South American country, "but recently, the mosquito-borne disease has
also been found in an adjoining coastal region, as well as further
inland to the east and south," the news service writes.

"According to a report released in June by the U.N. Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC), from 2006 to
2010, every millimeter increase in rainfall and one-degree rise in
temperature led to an additional 11 cases of malaria," an effect that
"is likely to be amplified in the future, as temperatures and rainfall
are predicted to head higher, bringing about changes in vector
patterns," the news service reports.

"While there are still gaps in scientific knowledge about the links
between climate change and malaria, many researchers expect the
disease to increase in areas where it is already prevalent as the
world warms, shortening incubation periods, and to spread to new
regions -- particularly higher altitudes," AlertNet notes (Earle,
9/7).

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

******
[2]
Date: Wed 7 Sep 2011
Source: Alert Net [edited]
http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/warming-guyana-coast-risks-malaria-resurgence


Guyana is battling to prevent the spread of malaria as climate change
brings higher temperatures and more rainfall, threatening to push the
disease back into densely populated coastal regions.

In the tiny South American nation, 90 percent of malaria cases are
found in the northwest, which experiences the heaviest rainfall,
including the northernmost coastline. But recently, the mosquito-borne
disease has also been found in an adjoining coastal region, as well as
further inland to the east and south.

Since the early 1990s, Guyana -- a member of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) -- has succeeded in reducing malaria from 92 000 cases a
year to around 10 000, thanks to the use of treated bed nets,
education on malaria drugs and training of health personnel, according
to officials.

Prior to that, a DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) insecticide
campaign in the 1950s and 1960s had eliminated the mosquito-borne
disease from the country's densely populated coastal areas -- mainly
in the northeast, around and below Georgetown.

Health Minister Leslie Ramsammy is now concerned that climate change
could bring it back to those regions. "My greatest fear for Guyana is
that, if we don't take control of malaria right now, because of
climate change, the vector for malaria is going to spread on the
coast," he told AlertNet. A vector is an organism that carries a
pathogen, such as the mosquito that hosts the malaria parasite.

Recent research confirms that climate shifts are causing an increase
in malaria cases in Guyana. According to a report released in June
[2011] by the U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (UNECLAC), from 2006 to 2010, every millimetre increase in
rainfall and one-degree rise in temperature led to an additional 11
cases of malaria.

That effect is likely to be amplified in the future, as temperatures
and rainfall are predicted to head higher, bringing about changes in
vector patterns.

While there are still gaps in scientific knowledge about the links
between climate change and malaria, many researchers expect the
disease to increase in areas where it is already prevalent as the
world warms, shortening incubation periods, and to spread to new
regions -- particularly higher altitudes.

"Climate change does 2 things: it amplifies disease species, and then
it brings diseases closer to human beings," Ramsammy said. "While the
climate change impacts on flood and the diseases that come with floods
are well known, we have not focused on the ecological changes it
brings," he said, pointing to the environmental shifts that will
influence the spread of vector-borne diseases like malaria and
dengue.

In Guyana, the mosquito that most often carries the malaria parasite
-- the Anopheles mosquito -- is mainly found in hinterland areas. "But
as climate change causes differences in the special distribution of
species, there will be a creeping effect," Ramsammy said. "What
frightens me is that the vector that used to be away from the
population on the shorelines of the country is now spreading more
widely into the [highly populated] areas," he said.

Miners falling sick
-------------------
In Guyana, it is not just climate change that threatens to put malaria
back on an upward trend. The ECLAC report also notes non-climatic
drivers, including population growth, urbanisation and economic
development.

According to minister Ramsammy, a proliferation of mining camps in the
interior, which offer short-term work opportunities, is also
complicating efforts to curb the disease. In those impoverished parts
of the country, there is a lack of health workers to carry out malaria
prevention work and treat those who become infected.

a Rastafarian in his fifties who worked for a few weeks at Omai, a
gold-mining area in the western region of Cuyuni-Mazaruni, told
AlertNet he had decided to go to a clinic for a malaria test after
experiencing most of the symptoms of the parasitic disease. Omai had
been flooded due to heavy rains, providing an ideal breeding ground
for mosquitoes.

"I came out about a month ago with these symptoms. I don't feel bad
during the day but when evening approaches, I get pains, headaches and
my skin hurts," he said, while awaiting his test results.

Patients are given a blood test, and receive the results an hour or so
later. The test confirms not only whether someone has contracted
malaria, but which strain of the parasite they are infected with.
Depending on their condition, they are either given drugs and sent
home, or admitted to hospital for more intensive treatment and
monitoring.

Another attendee at the clinic, an 18-year-old man, said he had spent
just over a month in the interior mining district of Aranka before
becoming infected with malaria. Although he took pills, his symptoms
got worse. "I was exposed to a lot of mosquitoes," he said,
complaining of fever, sweating and cramps.

These 2 are both 1st-time malaria patients, although the places where
they worked are located in common malaria regions.

Minister Ramsammy said Guyana's health sector cannot keep malaria in
check alone, and needs cooperation from pharmaceutical importers,
non-governmental organisations and donors, including the World Health
Organisation (WHO) and the U.S. government.

The health ministry has launched a programme to help different parts
of the country limit the spread of malaria-carrying mosquitoes. And
with the support of the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the
WHO and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), it has
surveyed pharmacies to check whether they are stocking the right
malaria medicines.

[Byline: Johann Earle, a Georgetown-based freelance writer with an
interest in climate change issues.]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
promed@promedmail.org

[The latest data from PAHO indicate that the API (Annual Parasite
Index) declined from 55 to 15 from 2005 to 2007 (Now data are
available from PAHO since 2007.
(http://ais.paho.org/phip/viz/malaria_surv_indicators_popup.asp).

In 2005 there was 38,984 malaria positive blood films out of 210 429
obtained compared to 11 657 positive blood films in 2007 out of 178
005 obtained. Guyana reported 13 673 confirmed cases and 169 309
suspected cases of malaria in 2009 (World Malaria Report 2010
(http://www.who.int/malaria/world_malaria_report_2010/en/index.html),
which probably indicate that surveillance and notification is erratic
and the data incomplete.

One explanation for the reduction in cases could be the introduction
of artemether/lumefantrine and the first drug of choice for treatment
in 2004.

The average number of malaria cases in Guyana annually between 1991
and 1998 was 48 805 (PAHO
http://www.paho.org/english/ad/dpc/cd/cartagena-4-guy.pdf)

HealthMap location: http://healthmap.org/r/00IH. - Mod.EP]

.................................................sb/ep/ejp/dk
</body>
