<header id=055440>
Published Date: 2011-08-12 06:46:01 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Mycobacterium haemophilum - USA: (WA) tattoo
Archive Number: 20110812.2444
</header>
<body id=055440>
MYCOBACTERIUM HAEMOPHILUM - USA: (WASHINGTON) TATTOO
****************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Wed 10 Aug 2011
Source: Fox News [edited]
http://www.foxnews.com/health/2011/08/10/tattoos-linked-to-hard-to-treat-bacterial-infection/


A rare but difficult-to-treat bacterial infection that usually strikes
people with impaired immune systems is showing up for the 1st time in
healthy individuals getting tattoos, the Centers of Disease Control
and Prevention [CDC] reported on Tue 9 Aug 2011].

Two cases of skin infections caused by this bacterium, called
_Mycobacterium haemophilum_, have occurred in individuals receiving
tattoos in the Seattle area, CDC said. These bacteria are in the same
family as those that cause tuberculosis [_Mycobacterium tuberculosis_]
and leprosy [_Mycobacterium leprae_]. Symptoms of the infection
include small bumps at the site of infection, in addition to redness,
pain, swelling, and discharge, the researchers said. The infection is
not responsive to traditional antibiotic treatments, and even with the
right drugs, can take months to heal.

Because of the rarity of the infections, tattoo aficionados shouldn't
be too worried, the researchers say. But the researchers want to
increase awareness of these infections so doctors know to look for
them, said study researcher Meagan Kay, a CDC Epidemic Intelligence
Service [EIS] officer with the public health department in Seattle and
King County. "Clinicians should consider this bacterium as a potential
cause of skin infections in persons who have recently received a
tattoo," Kay said.

Kay and colleagues were asked to investigate a case of a 44 year old
man who developed a rash, then small bumps on his arm after getting a
tattoo there in August 2009. The lesions remained for weeks after
treatment with several antibiotics. It wasn't until months later that
researchers figured out the man was infected with _M. haemophilum_.
Doctors then treated him with 3 different antibiotics simultaneously,
but the infection still took about 6 months to heal.

A 2nd case was also suspected, but not confirmed, at the same tattoo
parlor. That patient had similar symptoms to the 44 year old man. The
tattoo parlor was investigated, and was found to meet Washington
State's safety and sanitation standards. Tap water was used to dilute
tattoo ink, and may have been the source of the bacteria, CDC said.
While using tap water is not against standards, the researchers
recommended tattoo artists instead use distilled or sterile water at
all times.

It's not clear why these 2 people developed _M. haemophilum_
infections even though they had healthy immune systems, but it may be
because tattooing breaks the skin, which is normally a barrier to
infection, Kay said. To avoid tattoo infections, consumers should make
sure the tattoo parlor they go to has properly trained artists, is
clean, and uses sterile equipment, Kay said. People who believe their
tattoo to be infected should consult with their doctor, she said.

The report is published in the September issue of the CDC journal
Emerging Infectious Diseases [Kay MK, Perti TR, Duchin JS:
Tattoo-associated _Mycobacterium haemophilum_ skin infection in
immunocompetent adult, 2009. Emerg Infect Dis. 2011; [Epub ahead of
print]. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/17/9/pdfs/10-2011.pdf]

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[This news release describes cutaneous _Mycobacterium haemophilum¬_
infection at a tattoo site, microbiologically confirmed in one
immunocompetent person and suspected in another; both had been
tattooed in 2009 at the same tattoo parlor in Seattle, Washington.

_M. haemophilum_ is a slow growing, non-photochromogenic
non-tuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) that requires conditions for
growth in vitro that may not be routine for mycobacteria. For example,
it grows optimally at cooler temperatures (30 to 32 deg C/86 to 89.6
deg F), which is similar to that for _Mycobacterium marinum_ and
_Mycobacterium ulcerans_, other cutaneous pathogens.; it also requires
hemoglobin, hemin, or ferric ammonium citrate for growth
(http://rpatologiahfmp.org/descargas/microbiologia/Mycobacteriology.pdf).
As a result, the frequency of _M. haemophilum_ infection is likely
underestimated.

_M. haemophilum¬_ has increasingly been recognized as an important
human pathogen, mainly causing septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and
pulmonary and disseminated infection, usually as a complication of a
primary _M. haemophilum¬_ skin infection, in severely
immunocompromised patients, such as patients with AIDS and those
receiving immunosuppressive therapy for organ transplantation.
Pyomyositis, central venous catheter tunnel infection,
endophthalmitis, and epididymal abscess have also been reported in
transplant recipients
(http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/223133-clinical).

In immunocompetent children, the organism causes cervical
lymphadenitis. _M. haemophilum_ cutaneous infection has also
previously been linked to tattooing (Giulieri S, Morisod B, Edney T,
et al: Outbreak of _Mycobacterium haemophilum_ infections after
permanent makeup of the eyebrows. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 52(4): 488-
91. PubMed doi:10.1093/cid/ciq191).

Based on limited data from individual cases, treatment of _M.
haemophilum_ infection has been a multidrug regimen that includes
antibiotics such as clarithromycin, ciprofloxacin, and rifampin or
rifabutin
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC172903/pdf/090435.pdf),
plus at times surgical debridement of cutaneous lesions. In
immunocompetent children with lymphadenitis, surgical excision of the
infected lymph node has been the preferred treatment.

Washington State and the city of Seattle can be seen on the
HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at
http://healthmap.org/r/17SI. - Mod.ML]

.................................................mpp/ml/mj/sh
</body>
