<header id=039305>
Published Date: 2011-11-27 17:10:18 EST
Subject: PRO/EDR> NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - Italy: link to India
Archive Number: 20111127.3466
</header>
<body id=039305>
NDM-1 CARRYING ENTEROBACTERIACEAE - ITALY: CLUSTER LINKED TO INDIA
******************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Thu 24 Nov 2011
Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 16, Issue 47 [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=20027


Between July 2011 and August 2011, the New Delhi
metallo-beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1) gene was detected in _Klebsiella
pneumoniae_ and _Escherichia coli_ isolates obtained from 6 patients
hospitalized in 4 healthcare facilities in northern Italy. A patient
who had been hospitalized in New Delhi, India, from February to May
2011 and subsequently in the Bologna area, Italy, from May to July
2011, may have been the source of the outbreak. Our findings suggest
ongoing spread of this carbapenem-resistance gene in Italy and
highlight the need for intensive surveillance.

Outbreak description
----------------
On 2 Jul 2011, we isolated _K. pneumoniae_ harboring the New Delhi
metallo-beta-lactamase gene (blaNDM), cultured from the urine of a
patient (Patient 1) who was admitted to a nursing home (Facility A),
in Bologna, Italy. In the same period, 2 blaNDM-positive _K.
pneumoniae_ isolates were identified in patients in 2 hospitals
(Facilities B and C) in the Bologna area on 8 Jul 2011 (Patient 2) and
13 Jul 2011 (Patient 3), respectively. Patient 2 had been previously
admitted to the same nursing home (Facility A) as Patient 1.
Subsequently, 2 further blaNDM-positive _K. pneumoniae_ isolates were
identified on 18 and 22 Jul 2011 from Patients 4 and 5, respectively,
who were in the same nursing home as Patient 1. Retrospective analysis
of the hospital records indicated a possible epidemiological link
between Patients 1, 2, 4 and 5 since the timing of the stays of
Patients 2, 4 and 5 in healthcare facilities overlapped with that of
Patient 1 (from June to July 2011), and 4 of these 5 patients
(Patients 1, 2, 4 and 5) had been admitted to the same nursing home.
Patient 3 had been in the same hospital (Facility C) as Patient 1 in
the 2nd week of July 2011.

In addition, an _E. coli_ harboring blaNDM was isolated on 8 Aug 2011
from a patient (Patient 6) who was hospitalized in a 4th facility, a
tertiary hospital (Facility D) in the same geographical area.
Epidemiological investigations suggested that this patient was
probably the source of the outbreak: this patient had been
hospitalized from February to May 2011 in New Delhi, India, and then,
after arriving in Italy, in a 5th facility (Facility E) from 25 May to
11 Jul 2011. During the stay in Facility E and before the detection of
an NDM-producing _E. coli_ in August 2011, _E. coli_ had been cultured
from 4 urine samples (initially on 26 May 2011). These isolates showed
an elevated level of resistance to carbapenems: the antimicrobial
susceptibility of these 4 isolates was very similar to that of the
isolate bearing NDM that we subsequently isolated. Unfortunately, we
did not have the opportunity to test for the presence of NDM in these
1st 4 isolates from this patient, as this routine diagnosis was
carried out in another laboratory. It should be noted that the culture
from the 4th sample also led to the isolation of a _K. pneumoniae_
strain with reduced susceptibility to carbapenems.

It is noteworthy that Patients 1 to 5 had no reported history of
travel to or hospitalisation in an NDM-1 endemic area. It was not
possible to identify a direct epidemiological link between Patient 6
and the other 5 patients. Patient 6 had been hospitalized in the same
hospital (Facility C) as 2 other patients in this outbreak (Patients 1
and 3). From the information currently available, it is not possible
to identify a possible link between Patient 6 and Patients 2, 4 and
5.

The dates of the stays of Patients 1-6 in the healthcare facilities
are shown in the Table [For table, see original URL. - Mod.LL].

Background
---------
Carbapenems are the preferred treatment for severe infections caused
by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria producing an
extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL). For this reason, the
increasing and rapid spread of mobile genetic elements that determine
acquired resistance to carbapenems and all other beta-lactams in
Enterobacteriaceae (1) is of great concern. In the last few years, the
considerable spread of carbapenem-resistant _K. pneumoniae_ strains
harboring the _K. pneumoniae_ carbapenemase (KPC) gene (blaKPC) has
been reported in Europe (2) and has greatly affected Italy (3,4).

Recently, an increase in the spread of a novel acquired carbapenemase,
New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase 1 (NDM-1), which can be produced by
several Enterobacteriaceae species, has been reported in Europe: a
total of 77 cases were reported from 13 countries from 2008 to 2010
(2). In Italy, NDM-1-positive isolates were 1st described earlier in
2011 (5): NDM-1-positive _E. coli_ was found in a patient with an
indirect epidemiological link to NDM-1-endemic areas. Transient
colonization was apparently seen in another patient linked to the
index case.

Laboratory investigations
-------------------
The carbapenem-resistant strains were collected from 4 different
Italian healthcare facilities in the Bologna area. Routine
determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) was
performed by using a VITEK2 automated system (bioMerieux, France), and
the results were interpreted according to the European Committee on
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing [EUCAST] guidelines (6). Isolates
that showed reduced susceptibility to ertapenem (greater to equal to
0.5 mg/L) were further evaluated in order to investigate the mechanism
of resistance. This phenotype is thought to arise from the production
of carbapenemase or metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL) or ESBL associated
with porin loss. As a phenotypic confirmatory test for carbapenemase
production, the modified Hodge test (7) and a disc-diffusion synergy
test (ROSCO Diagnostica, Denmark) were performed.

Between 1 Mar and 30 Aug 2011, a total of 44 Enterobacteriaceae
isolates that showed reduced susceptibility to carbapenems and in
which the blaKPC gene was not detected were screened for the presence
of an MBL-resistance mechanism. The disc-diffusion synergy test
indicated MBL production (inhibition of carbapenemase activity by
dipicolinic acid) for the 6 isolates (5 _K. pneumoniae_ and 1 _E.
coli_).

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the blaNDM-1 gene and
direct cloning and sequencing of the PCR product was performed as
previously described (8). The sequences obtained were compared using
BLAST (basic local alignment search tool) (9). In accordance with the
phenotypic results, this molecular testing confirmed the presence of
the blaNDM-1 gene in all 6 isolates, with 99.9 percent identity with
blaNDM-1 gene present in GenBank (JF714412.1). In addition, all the
isolates contained the blaTEM-1 gene.

The 6 blaNDM-positive isolates showed MICs of greater than 8 mg/L for
ertapenem, while for imipenem, the MICs ranged from less than one to
greater than 32 mg/L and for meropenem from 2 to 4 mg/mL. Furthermore,
they had a high resistance rate to other classes of antimicrobials,
such as fluoroquinolones and aminoglyocosides. The only drugs that
showed a good level of antimicrobial activity against all 6 isolates
in vitro were tigecycline and colistin, with MICs of less than or
equal to 2 mg/L and less than to equal to 1 mg/L, respectively. The
antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of the 6 isolates are listed in
the Table.

Discussion
---------
After the 1st identification of NDM-production in _K. pneumoniae_ and
_E. coli_ isolates in a Swedish patient of Indian origin in 2009, NDM
has been detected in all continents (10). Enterobacteriaceae that
carry carbapenemase-producing genes, including blaNDM and blaKPC, are
considered an important public health problem because of ability of
these genes to spread (1) and the considerable clinical impact of this
type of antimicrobial resistance on the management of
healthcare-associated infections.

This study reports an outbreak of NDM-producing Enterobacteriaceae
colonisation or infection in Italy, where previously there had been
only a single report of NDM in isolates from 2 patients, in a
different part of the country (5). As at the time of microbiological
diagnosis, the 6 patients in our study were hospitalized in 4
different healthcare facilities: epidemiological investigations
suggested a likely link between 5 of the patients (Patients 1-5). For
the 6th patient, it was not possible to identify a possible direct
link between this patient and all the other patients. Nevertheless,
Patient 6 could be the possible source of this outbreak because of the
patient's history of previous hospitalisation in New Delhi before
admission to a healthcare facility in the Bologna area, where
NDM-positive isolates had not been previously reported. We can
consequently hypothesize that the NDM-producing bacterial strains were
transmitted nosocomially to other patients.

The detection of the NDM-1 gene in 5 strains of _K. pneumoniae_ and
one _E. coli_ strain confirms that for this resistance mechanism, the
risk of spread is not only among clonally related strains of the same
species: this gene can also be efficiently spread to other bacterial
species. The rapid spread of this gene is not unexpected (10,11) and
has been already described among several Enterobacteriaceae species,
mainly _K. pneumoniae_, in the UK [12]. Further molecular studies are
currently in progress in order to better define the correlation
between these NDM-positive strains identified in our study.

Given our findings, it will be extremely important to apply strict
measures of surveillance and infection control in order to limit the
spread of carbapenem-resistance genes in Enterobacteriaceae into other
areas of Italy.

References
--------
1. Walsh TR: Emerging carbapenemases: a global perspective. Int J
Antimicrob Agents. 2010;36: S8-14.
2. Struelens MJ, Monnet DL, Magiorakos AP, Santos O'Connor F, Giesecke
J; European NDM-1 Survey Participants. New Delhi
metallo-beta-lactamase 1-producing Enterobacteriaceae: emergence and
response in Europe. Euro Surveill. 2010;15(46). pii: 19716. Available
from:
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19716.
3. Gaibani P, Ambretti S, Berlingeri A, : Rapid increase of
carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae strains in a large
Italian hospital: surveillance period 1 Mar - 30 Sep 2010. Euro
Surveill. 2011;16(8). pii: 19800. Available from:
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19800.
4. Agodi A, Voulgari E, Barchitta M, Politi L, Koumaki V, Spanakis N,
et al. Containment of an outbreak of KPC-3-producing Klebsiella
pneumoniae in Italy. J Clin Microbiol. 2011;49: 3986-3989.
5. D'Andrea MM, Venturelli C, Giani T, et al; Persistent carriage and
infection by multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli ST405 producing
NDM-1 carbapenemase: report on the first Italian cases. J Clin
Microbiol. 2011;49: 2755-2758.
6. European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing
[EUCAST]: Breakpoint tables for interpretation of MICs and zone
diameters. 2011. Version 1.3, 5 Jan 2011. Available from:
http://www.eucast.org/fileadmin/src/media/PDFs/EUCAST_files/Disk_test_documents/EUCAST_breakpoints_v1.3_pdf..
7. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI). Performance
standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing; twenty-first
informational supplement. CLSI document M100-S21. Wayne, PA: CLSI;
2011. Available from:
http://www.clsi.org/source/orders/free/m100-s21.pdf.
8. Nordmann P, Poirel L, Carrer A, Toleman MA, Walsh TR: How to detect
NDM-1 producers. J Clin Microbiol. 2011;49: 718-721.
9. BLAST: Bethesda, MD: National National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST.
10. Cornaglia G, Giamarellou H, Rossolini GM: Metallo-B-lactamases: a
last frontier for B-lactams? Lancet Infect Dis. 2011;11: 381-393.
11. Nordmann P, Couard JP, Sansot D, Poirel L: Emergence of an
autochthonous and community-acquired NDM-1-producing Klebsiella
pneumoniae in Europe. Clin Infect Dis. 2011 Sep 29. [Epub ahead of
print].
12. Kumarasamy KK, Toleman MA, Walsh TR, et al: Emergence of a new
antibiotic resistance mechanism in India, Pakistan, and the UK: a
molecular, biological, and epidemiological study. Lancet Infect Dis.
2010;10: 597-602.

[Authors: Gaibani P, Ambretti S, Berlingeri A, et al]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Originating in India, NDM-1 containing bacteria have spread to other
parts of the world. As reported in the 25 Jun 2010 Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report (2010;59:750), during the 1st half of 2010, 3
isolates of _Enterobacteriaceae_, an _E. coli_, a _Klebsiella
pneumoniae_, and an _Enterobacter cloacae_, were identified at CDC to
carry NDM-1, which confers resistance to all beta-lactams except
aztreonam (a monobactam) and were also resistant to aztreonam. All 3
isolates were from patients who received recent medical care in
India.

Yong and colleagues (Yong D, Toleman MA, Giske CG, et al:
Characterization of a new metallo-beta-lactamase gene, bla-NCm-1, and
novel erythromycin esterase gene carried on a unique genetic structure
in _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ sequence type 14 from India. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother. 2009;53: 5046-54) found that the plasmid carrying
NDM-1 also carries several other resistance genes and appears to
easily transmit itself to other organisms. The authors state that "the
dissemination of this plasmid among clinical bacteria would be a
nightmare scenario."

This NDM-1 gene cassette of wide-spectrum antimicrobial resistance
appears to have developed in the Indian subcontinent, as in the above
report, where the use of antimicrobial agents is quite poorly
controlled. Organisms carrying this resistance combination have
already been introduced into western Europe, the USA, and Canada. The
best methods of control are rapid recognition by standard
microbiologic/nucleic acid methodology in patients having the
appropriate medical/travel history and aggressive hand washing
techniques.

The amazing overuse of our current antimicrobial armamentarium that I
am currently observing in my clinical practice in the USA will no
doubt serve as an efficient multiplier of these isolates, just as
intravenous drug abuse and sexual promiscuity facilitated the
explosion of HIV 30 years ago. This misuse, in my opinion, is directly
related to the lack of control of antimicrobial usage in intensive
care units and emergency care settings by intensivists and ER
physicians who often react with a lack of wisdom and "cookbook"
protocols instead of using common sense and rational prescribing
patterns. Once the patient moves out of the ICU or ER, the physicians
do not even see the products of their unwise labors.

In the USA, reimbursements for medical care are based on procedures,
not thought processes. Until the power of therapeutic nihilism is
recognized -- that is, using these agents only when rational, in
combinations that make sense, and in settings where therapeutic
interventions can have the ability to produce measurable and
meaningful improvement in a patient's life -- the medical community
will continue down the slippery slope into an era where no therapeutic
options will exist. - Mod.LL]
See Also
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - India (02): nosocomial infections 20111006.3009
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - India, China: govt. response 20110412.1156
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae - India: (New Delhi) water supply 20110411.1145
2010
----
Gram negative bacilli, resistant, update (01): NDM-1, KPC 20101028.3908
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae (04): Taiwan ex India 20101005.3604
VIM carrying Enterobacteriaceae - USA ex Greece: 1st rep. 20100922.3422
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae (03): worldwide ex India, Pakistan 20100914.3325
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae (02): worldwide ex India, Pakistan 20100817.2853
NDM-1 carrying Enterobacteriaceae: N America, UK ex India 20100815.2812
.................................................ll/msp/lm
</body>
