<header id=033635>
Published Date: 2011-09-16 07:56:40 EDT
Subject: PRO/PL> Purple leaf, carrot - Europe: 1st rep, (Spain)
Archive Number: 20110916.2824
</header>
<body id=033635>
PURPLE LEAF, CARROT - EUROPE: FIRST REPORT, (SPAIN)
***************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: August 2011
Source: European Plant Protection Organisation (EPPO) Reporting
Service 8/2011/177 [edited]
http://archives.eppo.org/EPPOReporting/2011/Rse-1108.pdf


New data on quarantine pests and pests of the EPPO Alert List
-------------------------------------------------------------
[New host plants]

In 2008 and 2009, _Spiroplasma citri_ was detected in commercial
fields of carrots (_Daucus carota_) in several areas of Spain
(Alicante, Segovia, and Valladolid). Affected plants showed leaf
curling, yellowing and purple discolouration, stunting of shoots and
tap root, and formation of bunchy, fibrous secondary roots. Although
there had been earlier records of 'carrot purple leaf' from Washington
state in the USA, this is the 1st time that _S. citri_ is detected on
carrots in Europe.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[_Spiroplasma citri_ causes citrus stubborn disease (CSD; also called
little leaf), which has been reported, from the Americas, New Zealand,
and parts of the Mediterranean region. Symptoms of CSD include
stunting of trees, misshapen fruit, rosetting and distortion of
leaves, off-season flowering, and yield losses may be severe. The
pathogen is also know to affect other crops causing, for example,
carrot purple leaf and horseradish brittle root diseases. _S. citri_
strains from different locations and hosts have been shown to have a
high degree of genetic variability, but no host specificity of strains
has been identified.

The pathogen is transmitted by _Circulifer tenellus_ (beet leafhopper)
and other leafhopper species. Both the pathogen and vector species
have wide host ranges resulting in many potential pathogen and/or
vector reservoirs. In carrots, mixed infections with phytoplasmas have
been reported to occur. But _S. citri_ has been reported to satisfy
Koch's postulates as the cause of purple leaf disease when it was
shown to be transmitted to carrots by _C. tenellus_. Disease
management for spiroplasmas mainly relies on exclusion by use of
certified clean planting material, but may also include
phytosanitation to remove inoculum and prevent spread within
plantings. Vector control has not shown to be effective due to its
very rapid transmission.

Spiroplasmas are plant cell parasitic bacteria without a cell wall
and, like the phytoplasmas, belong to the mollicutes. The name is
derived from their helical morphology. Spiroplasmas can be cultured on
artificial media, unlike phytoplasmas, which cannot be cultured in
vitro.

Maps
Spain:
http://www.map-of-spain.co.uk/large-map-of-spain.htm and
http://healthmap.org/r/1f3e
Europe, overview:
http://www.edinphoto.org.uk/0_MAPS/0_map_europe_political_2001_enlarged.jpg

Pictures
Citrus stubborn disease:
http://photos.eppo.org/albums/pests/Bacteria/Spiroplasma_citri___vectors/SPIRCI_01.jpg,
http://www.plantwise.org/Uploads/CompendiaImages/Normal/Mfa61.jpg,
and
http://www.srpv-midi-pyrenees.com/_publique/sante_vgtx/organismes_nuisibles_et_lutte_obligatoire/images_nuisibles/spiroplasma_citri_1.jpg
(fruit)
_S. citri_, symptoms and vectors, photo galleries:
http://www.eppo.org/QUARANTINE/bacteria/Spiroplasma_citri_&_vectors/SPIRCI_images.htm
and
http://www.ipmimages.org/browse/subimages.cfm?sub=12168
_S. citri_ vector _C. tenellus_:
http://www.biolib.cz/IMG/GAL/41127.jpg
_S. citri_ microscopy:
http://iant.toulouse.inra.fr/bacteria/annotation/web/img/spiroplasma.jpg

Links
_S. citri_ association with purple leaf of carrot and vectors:
http://gradworks.umi.com/33/41/3341752.html,
http://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/abs/10.1094/PD-90-0989,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19736751, and
http://www.pnva.org/fview.src?ID=56&
First report of _S. citri_ in carrot in Europe:
http://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/abs/10.1094/PDIS-05-10-0386
Information on _S. citri_:
http://www.plantwise.org/?dsid=50977&loadmodule=plantwisedatasheet&page=4270&site=234
(incl. host range & distribution map),
http://www.eppo.org/QUARANTINE/bacteria/Spiroplasma_citri_&_vectors/SPIRCI_ds.pdf,
http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev.phyto.41.052102.104034,
and
http://www.ivia.es/iocv/archivos/proceedingsX/10th295_299.pdf
_S. citri_ taxonomy:
http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/2133. - Mod.DHA]

.................................................dha/mj/mpp
</body>
