<header id=034635>
Published Date: 2011-08-11 14:18:59 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Avian influenza, human (55): data analysis
Archive Number: 20110811.2439
</header>
<body id=034635>
AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (55): DATA ANALYSIS
******************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Thu 11 Aug 22011
Source: Eurosurveillance 2011; 16(32), 11 Aug [edited]
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ViewArticle.aspx?ArticleId=19941


Avian influenza A(H5N1) in humans: new insights from a line list of
WHO confirmed cases, Sep 2006 to Aug 2010
---------------------------
Research article by Fiebig L, Soyka J, Buda S, Buchholz U, Dehnert M,
Haas W. in Euro Surveill. 2011;16(32):pii=19941.

Summary
-------
The threat of avian influenza (AI) viruses to humans in Europe in 2005
prompted the Robert Koch Institute to establish a routine monitoring
instrument condensing information on all human AI cases worldwide
reported from the World Health Organization (WHO) and other sources
into a line list for further analysis. The 235 confirmed AI cases
captured from September 2006 to August 2010 had a case fatality rate
of 56 per cent (132/235), ranging from 28 per cent (27/98) in Egypt to
87 per cent (71/82) in Indonesia. In a multivariable analysis, odds of
dying increased by 33 per cent with each day that passed from symptom
onset until hospitalisation (OR: 1.33, p=0.002). In relation to
children of 0-9 years, odds of fatal outcome were more than 6 times
higher in 10-19 year-olds and 20-29 year-olds (OR: 6.06, 95 per cent
CI: 1.89-19.48, p=0.002 and OR: 6.16, 95 per cent CI: 2.05-18.53,
p=0.001, respectively), and nearly 5 times higher in patients of 30
years and older (OR: 4.71, 95 per cent CI: 1.56-14.27, p=0.006)
irrespective of the country which had notified WHO of the cases. The
situation in Egypt was special in that case number and incidence in
children were more than twice as high as in any other age group or
country. With this study, we show that data from the public domain
yield important epidemiological information on the global AI
situation. This approach to establish a line list is time-consuming,
but a line list is a prerequisite to such evaluations. We thus would
like to encourage the placing of a publicly accessible line list of
anonymised human AI cases -- for example, directly by WHO. This might
enhance our understanding of AI in humans and permit the rapid
detection of changes in its epidemiology with implications for human
health.

Introduction
------------
Avian influenza (AI) has received public attention since 1997 when
human infections and thereof 6 fatal cases due to the highly
pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) virus strain were confirmed in Hong
Kong [1,2] and the pandemic potential of AI viruses was recognised
[3]. Since 2003, when avian influenza A(H5N1) reappeared, the World
Health Organization (WHO) has reported 526 human infections with avian
influenza A(H5N1), of which 311 were fatal, from Central Asian,
European and African countries [4]. In several areas, highly
pathogenic AI in poultry has become endemic, with implications on
human health, as exposure to sick or dead poultry is a risk factor for
AI in humans [2,5-8]. Because of the pandemic potential of avian
influenza A(H5N1), there is a great need for joint risk assessments
and as a prerequisite for rapid international sharing of biological
materials, reference reagents, epidemiologic data and other
information when available -- for example, between WHO member states
and WHO [9].

Unique efforts were made to share information on AI infections in
humans, domestic poultry and wild birds [10,11] -- for exampl, through
the reporting of confirmed human cases under the International Health
Regulations (2005), supported by the WHO Global Alert and Response
System (GAR) [12]. Case-based reports irrespective of the confirmation
status have been mainly circulated by the Program for Monitoring
Emerging Diseases of the International Society for Infectious Diseases
(ProMED-mail) [13]. News agencies such as Reuters Alertnet [14], and
public health authorities, including the European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control (ECDC) [15], the World Organisation for Animal
Health (OIE)/Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) network on animal
influenza (OFFLU) [16], and the Global Initiative on Sharing Avian
Influenza Data (GISAID) [17], have contributed in compiling and
publishing updates on AI in humans and birds online. However, a
uniform, case-based and thus statistically analysable epidemiological
database of all human AI cases is not yet publicly available.

Germany, in need for timely information on the AI situation when
Europe faced 1st avian influenza A(H5N1) cases in birds in 2005,
established an AI monitoring system at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI)
in October 2005, which captures case-based information on AI
infections in humans, as well as animal cases with zoonotic potential,
worldwide. This system proved particularly useful for situation
updates, risk assessments and national risk communication from
February 2006 onwards, when avian influenza A(H5N1) was detected in
wild birds in Germany [18]. Although the body of literature has
continuously increased meanwhile, namely through WHO situation updates
[2,19-23], and virological or epidemiological studies [5,24-27], the
RKI AI monitoring system has been maintained to have a flexible
database available for epidemiological evaluations.

With the aim to examine whether a systematic line list based on
publicly available information on human AI cases would contribute to
the understanding of the epidemiology of human AI, we assessed case
characteristics, case fatality, and potential risk factors based on
our established line list.

Methods
-------
Monitoring system: The system established in October 2005, consists of
a database, collecting events and reports in chronological order, and
a line list of human cases. The present analysis is based exclusively
on the line list and covers information on human AI cases reported
between September 2006 and August 2010 and with a symptom onset date
not earlier than September 2006. The monitoring followed a
standardised operating procedure, defining information sources,
intervals for screening the data and for the database management (as
described below), and was maintained in Excel (version 11, Microsoft
Corporation, Redmond, Washington, USA).

Information sources: All screened information sources for human AI
cases were publicly accessible. They included WHO [12], ECDC [15],
ProMED [13], as well as Reuters Alertnet [14]. This range of sources
was accessed to anticipate the extent of non-confirmed human AI and to
assess the loss of information when ignoring them. All sources were
screened on a daily basis (weekdays only). If an event was reported
simultaneously by more than one source, and if there was conflicting
information, WHO reports were ranked highest, followed by ECDC and
ProMED. If an event was reported prior to a WHO report by another
source, both the WHO and the initial report were recorded.

Line list: The line list covered demographic case information, namely
the country to which the cases were assigned to in the initial
reports, the patients' age (in years) and sex, date of symptom onset,
date of hospitalisation, disease outcome, date of death, exposure to
potentially infected poultry, as well as possible contact with
infected individuals. Time intervals from symptom onset to
hospitalisation, from hospital admission to outcome, the duration of
hospitalisation, and the duration of illness were captured in days.
The line list and a description of the variable set are provided
online (http://www.rki.de/avian-influenza-linelist).

Case definitions: Cases were classified into 3 groups: confirmed
cases, non-confirmed probable, and suspected cases, in a more
simplified way than by WHO. Confirmed cases comprised avian influenza
A(H5N1) human cases reported by WHO and with WHO confirmation, i.e.
persons with defined clinical signs, epidemiological links and
laboratory confirmation by an influenza laboratory accepted by WHO, as
specified in the WHO case definition [28].

Other reported cases were (irrespective of their clinical
presentation) considered as probable if they had exposure to WHO
confirmed human cases, or to sick or dead poultry, or the AI virus
infection was confirmed by the country or local institutions but not
meeting WHO criteria. All other non-confirmed cases were defined as
suspected cases.

Data analyses: The line list records were compared to the cumulative
number of confirmed human cases of avian influenza A(H5N1) published
by WHO [12]. The delay (in days) between the date of WHO reporting,
and the date of the 1st report by another source than WHO, was
calculated for WHO confirmed cases.

Confirmed cases were further analysed for demographic and
epidemiological characteristics stratified by countries, including
China, Egypt, Indonesia and Vietnam (with 10 or more cases) and a
remaining group of all other countries. The cases were classified in
age groups of 10 year intervals. Incidences were calculated over the
study period as cases per 10 million population, using population data
from the United Nations [29]. Median and inter-quartile ranges (IQRs)
were calculated for continuous variables and absolute numbers and
proportions (together with 95 percent exact confidence intervals
(CIs)) for categorical variables. For comparison of characteristics,
the Kruskal-Wallis test, the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test and Fisher's
Exact test were used. Case fatality was assessed by calculating the
cumulative (cCFR) and a rolling case fatality rate (rCFR).
Investigated factors potentially associated with case fatality were
age (grouped as 0-9, 10-19, 20-29, 30 years or older), sex, country,
time from symptom onset to hospitalisation, and reported exposure to
poultry. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression had been
performed and results were presented as odds ratios (OR) with 95
percent confidence intervals. In multivariable analysis forward and
backward selection was applied on all variables, where sex was taken
into account in all calculations. All possible 2-way interaction terms
were tested separately and the likelihood ratio test was used to
analyse whether interaction terms improved the model at a significance
level of 10 percent. The reported p values are 2-sided and p less than
0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data were analysed
using Excel (version 11, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington,
USA) and Stata (version 11.0, StataCorp LP, TX, USA) software.

Results
-------
[This section has been abbreviated and interested readers should
access the original text via the source URL to view the full text, the
tables and figures, and the literature references cited throughout the
whole document. - Mod.CP]

Reported cases: In the study period, we captured 294 human AI cases in
12 different countries of which 235 (80 percent) were WHO confirmed,
35 (12 per cent) were classified as probable, and 24 (8 per cent) as
suspected. The proportion of confirmed cases was highest in Egypt
(98/99, 99 per cent) and lowest in Indonesia (82/126, 65 per cent).
Numbers of reported WHO confirmed cases in our line list were largely
congruent with cumulative case numbers published by WHO, except for
Indonesia with 82 versus 102 cases, respectively. This allowed for a
close reproduction of WHO graphs on avian influenza A(H5N1) human
cases by date of symptom onset and country, which reveal highest case
numbers in the winter and spring season of the northern hemisphere.

The median delay from symptom onset to the initial report by any
source was 11 days among 201 cases with available information. Egypt
had the shortest median delay of 7 days. 52 per cent of the confirmed
cases (123/235) were initially reported by another source than WHO in
a median of 3 days prior to the WHO report. The shortest median delay
between the initial report and the WHO report was 2 days in China and
Indonesia, whereas the longest median delay was 9 days in Viet Nam and
the grouped remaining countries.

Demographic characteristics: 57 per cent of confirmed cases (132/233
with available information) were women and 43 per cent (101/233) men
corresponding to a men-to-women ratio of 0.8. This ratio ranged from
0.6 to 1.3, with 0.6 in Indonesia, 0.8 in Egypt, 1.0 in the grouped
remaining countries, 1.1 in Viet Nam, and 1.3 in China.

The cases' median age was 18 years but was significantly higher in
women than in men (21 years in women vs. 14 years in men, p=0.04. The
median age differed markedly across countries. The lowest median age
of 6 years was found in Egypt with significant difference between
women and men (16.5 vs 4 years, respectively, p=0.002). In Egypt, the
youngest age group (0 to 9 years) accounted for the highest number of
cases with 53 of 98 cases (54 per cent) and had the highest incidence
of 284 cases per 10 million population of the same age group, over the
4-year study period. In contrast, Indonesia, China, and Viet Nam had
highest case numbers and incidences in the age group of 20 to 29
years.

Exposure to poultry: 96 per cent of confirmed cases (187/194 with
available information) had reportedly direct or indirect contact to
potentially infected poultry. The proportion of individuals with
reported exposure differed significantly across countries (p=0.009)
and ranged from 80 per cent to 100 per cent, with 8/10 in the grouped
remaining countries, 10/12 in China, 55/57 in Indonesia, 93/94 in
Egypt and 21/21 in Viet Nam without significant differences by the
cases' sex or age (p=0.70 and p=0.06, respectively).

Hospitalisation: All 228 cases with available information had been
hospitalised. Patients were admitted to hospital in a median of 4 days
after symptom onset. The median time from symptom onset to
hospitalisation ranged from 2-5 days, with 2 days in Egypt, 2.5 days
in the grouped remaining countries, 4 days in China and 5 days in
Indonesia and Viet Nam. No significant sex-specific differences were
found in this delay (p=0.706).

Case fatality: 56 per cent (132/235) of confirmed cases died. The CFR
differed across countries ranging from 28 per cent (27/98) in Egypt to
87 per cent (71/82) in Indonesia. The cCFR and the 19-month rCFR
indicated a decline in case fatality over the study period. Whereas
the cCFR was little affected by the outcome of new cases and had only
slightly decreased, the rCFR had steeply declined in the period from
April 2008 to April 2009. Until mid 2008, a large proportion of cases
occurred in Indonesia (country with highest CFR) and shifted
thereafter to Egypt (country with lowest CFR). Accordingly,
country-specific rCFRs for Indonesia and Egypt were less steep than
the overall rCFR. The 19-months rCFR was privileged as it was less
affected by case-free periods than rCFRs calculated over shorter
periods (not shown).

In Egypt, fatal cases had a median age of 25 years, which was, at
significant level, higher than the age of cases who survived (4 years,
p less than 0.001; Table 2). The CFR in Egypt was significantly higher
in women than in men, (39 per cent (22/56) vs 12 per cent (5/42)
respectively, p=0.003), which was not observed elsewhere (China: 63
per cent (5/8) in women vs 70 per cent (7/10) in men, p=1.0;
Indonesia: 84 per cent (43/51) vs 90 per cent (28/31), p=0.521; Viet
Nam: 58 per cent (7/12) vs 69 per cent (9/13), p=0.688; remaining
countries: 80 per cent (4/5) vs 40 per cent (2/5), p=0.524,
respectively).

A significant difference in time from symptom onset to hospitalisation
between survivors and fatal cases was only found in Egypt (one day vs
4.5 days respectively, p=0.001). All 19 cases worldwide hospitalised 8
days after symptom onset or later had died.

Discussion and conclusions
--------------------------
[The section also has been abbreviated and only conclusions are
presented here. Readers should consult the original document for the
full analysis. - Mod.CP]

With this study, we summarised the current global AI situation in
humans. It is, to our knowledge, the 1st study that not only analysed
human AI cases worldwide on the basis of a line list collected over
several years but in addition made these case-based data available
online. We found that a longer delay from symptom onset to hospital
admission and belonging to older age groups were associated with
higher mortality in AI patients, and that the situation in Egypt
differed markedly from other countries with highest AI incidences in
children and lowest CFR.

Confirmed cases had a median age of 18 years, which is consistent with
earlier findings, although investigation periods and affected
countries varied [2,19,21]. The identified predominance of female
cases in Indonesia and Egypt and the low age median among Egyptian
cases support findings from previous studies [2,23-25]. 96 percent of
the cases had reportedly direct or indirect contact to potentially
infected poultry, recognised as the most important risk factor for
humans AI [8,34].

The median time from symptom onset to hospitalisation was 4 days,
which is remarkably stable when compared to earlier studies [19,21].
If time to hospital admission is regarded as an indicator for
monitoring case management and patients' awareness [31], no progress
would be evident from a global perspective so far.

The cases' average CFR was 56 per cent, which is widely consistent
with findings from earlier investigation periods [2,19,23]. Using a
19-month rolling CFR, we found a clear decrease in case fatality,
which persisted when stratifying for Egypt and Indonesia. It could
thus not simply be explained by a predominance of Egyptian cases since
2009. Regarding the decreasing CFR in Egypt, Schroedl [32] suggested
that the circulating AI virus strain may have become less virulent and
more apt to spreading among children.

Analytical results revealed lowest odds of dying for Egyptian cases,
even when adjusted for age, sex and time to hospitalisation. Thus, the
high proportion of survivors in Egypt cannot be entirely explained --
as often assumed -- by sex-specific differences in CFR [21,24] and the
high proportion of children among AI patients in Egypt [5], as well as
short delays from symptom onset to hospitalisation [25].

It cannot be ruled out, that different virus clades circulating in
Egypt (clade 2.2) and Asia (clades 2.1 and 2.3) shape the
country-specific epidemiological features [2,23]. Differences in CFR
across countries and changes over time might also partly be explained
by differences in intensity and quality of exposure, health-seeking
behaviour, reporting attitudes, overall performance of the
surveillance system, and access to diagnostics and medical care
[23,27,39,40], such as the time to start of oseltamivir treatment, the
antiviral recommend by WHO for human infections with AI virus [2].
However, country-specific details on its administration are widely
unknown, and it remains controversial up to how many days after
symptom onset the application of the antiviral reduces mortality
[30,41]. In our study, all patients hospitalised 8 or more days after
symptom onset died. This suggests a rather narrow time window for
antiviral drug administration.

Our study points out that data extracted from the public domain
already yields pertinent epidemiological information for assessing the
current situation and developments of AI in humans. A line list format
as provided would enhance the analysability of key data, their
updating, and the evaluation of variables needed. Several countries
monitor the global AI situation, whether they currently face human AI
cases, e.g. Egypt [25], or not, e.g. France [27]. This indicates a
common interest in data and if they were directly provided in such
format, this would help to save time and resources for public health
authorities and researchers.

A line list needs to be flexible in view of potential new information
to be entered. New variables and parameter values might come up, when
the minimum dataset suggested Bird and Farrar [31] on direct and
indirect exposures to avian influenza A(H5N1) confirmed and
non-confirmed poultry and human exposures would be implemented or when
results from prospective studies involving exposed and unexposed
individuals as designed by Kayali et al. [34] are available.
Unconfirmed cases would ideally be recorded as systematically as
confirmed cases, either in a common or separate database as suggested
by Bird and Farrar [31].

Presenting cases in the format of a line list is not a goal in itself,
but a prerequisite for targeting surveillance and identifying risk
factors, as well as a starting point for prospective studies, e.g.
investigating potential human-to-human transmission, the
transmissibility of avian influenza viruses, and host-related factors
including age-dependent immunity in humans [33,42].

We would like to encourage that an anonymised case-based database for
AI in humans is directly placed publicly and continuously updated,
e.g. by an internationally renowned organisation such as WHO. Open
access to analysable data might accelerate the identification and
implementation of research questions and surveillance priorities and
thus enhance our understanding of -- still mostly fatal -- AI in
humans and permit the rapid detection of epidemiological changes with
implications for human health.

--
communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The editors of ProMED-mail are encouraged to learn that our database
has played a useful role in this analysis. - Mod.CP]
See Also
Avian influenza, human (54): Egypt, WHO 20110810.2427
Avian influenza, human (53): Cambodia, Egypt 20110803.2338
Avian influenza, human (52): Cambodia (BM) 20110729.2279
Avian influenza, human (51): Indonesia (AH) 20110721.2199
Avian influenza, human (50): Egypt, WHO 20110622.1911
Avian influenza, human (40): comment 20110428.1318
Avian influenza, human (30): Indonesia (WJ) 20110323.0921
Avian influenza, human (20): Egypt, WHO 20110308.0751
Avian influenza, human (10): Cambodia (Phnom Penh) WHO 20110210.0459
Avian influenza, human: Egypt, 117 & 118th cases & li 20110102.0019
.................................................cp/msp/sh
</body>
