<header id=036741>
Published Date: 2011-07-13 14:28:16 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrhoeae - Japan: ceftriaxone
Archive Number: 20110713.2114
</header>
<body id=036741>
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE, NEISSERIA GONORRHOEAE - JAPAN: CEFTRIAXONE
*****************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

[1]
Date: Sun 10 Jul 2011
Source: EurekAlert! [edited]
http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2011-07/ul-sdf070711.php


An international research team has discovered a strain of [_Neisseria
gonorrhoeae_] resistant to all currently available antibiotics. This
new strain is likely to transform a common and once easily treatable
infection into a global threat to public health. The details of the
discovery made by Dr Magnus Unemo, Dr Makoto Ohnishi, and colleagues
will be presented at the 19th conference of the International Society
for Sexually Transmitted Disease Research (ISSTDR), which runs 10-13
Jul [2011] in Quebec City, Canada.

The team of researchers successfully identified a heretofore unknown
variant of the bacterium that causes gonorrhea, _Neisseria
gonorrhoeae_. Analyzing this new strain, dubbed H041, allowed
researchers to identify the genetic mutations responsible for the
bacterium's extreme resistance to all cephalosporin-class
antibiotics-the last remaining drugs still effective in treating
gonorrhea.

"This is both an alarming and a predictable discovery," noted Dr
Unemo of the Swedish Reference Laboratory for Pathogenic Neisseria.
"Since antibiotics became the standard treatment for gonorrhea in the
1940s, this bacterium has shown a remarkable capacity to develop
resistance mechanisms to all drugs introduced to control it."

"While it is still too early to assess if this new strain has become
widespread, the history of newly emergent resistance in the bacterium
suggests that it may spread rapidly unless new drugs and effective
treatment programs are developed," Dr. Unemo continued.

Gonorrhea is one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases in
the world. In the US alone, according to the Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), the number of cases is estimated at 700
000 annually.

Gonorrhea is asymptomatic in about 50 percent of infected women and
approximately 2-5 percent of men. When symptomatic, it is
characterized by a burning sensation when urinating and pus discharge
from the genitals. If left untreated, gonorrhea can lead to serious
and irreversible health complications in both women and men.

In women, the infection can cause chronic pelvic pain and ectopic
pregnancy. It can lead to infertility, mostly in women but also in
men, and it increases the risk of HIV transmission. In 3-4 percent of
cases, untreated infections spread to the skin, blood, joints, or even
the heart and can cause potentially mortal lesions. Babies born of
infected mothers are at high risk of developing serious blood and
joint infections, and passage through the birth canal of an infected
mother can cause blindness in the infant.

[Byline: Jean-Francois Huppe]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall

******
[2]
Date: Tue 12 Jul 2011
Source: Mail Online [edited]
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2013376/Unstoppable-sex-disease-New-strain-gonorrhoea-resists-antibiotics-spread-quickly.html


A sexual disease that is resistant to all drugs has been discovered
by scientists. They warn the strain of super- [_Neisseria
gonorrhoeae_, the cause of gonorrhea] could spread very quickly unless
better treatments are developed. Although only one case has been
confirmed, experts fear many more may have gone unreported.

Until now gonorrhea has been very easy to treat with antibiotics
called cephalosporins. Patients usually need only a single pill or
jab. But Swedish scientists who have analysed the new strain found in
Japan believe that over the decades the disease has mutated to become
resistant to current treatments.

Magnus Unemo, of the Research Laboratory for Pathogenic Neisseria in
Orebro, [Sweden], described it as an alarming discovery. 'Since
antibiotics became the standard treatment for gonorrhea in the 1940s,
this bacterium has shown a remarkable capacity to develop resistance
mechanisms to all drugs introduced to control it,' he said. 'While it
is still too early to assess if this new strain has become widespread,
the history of newly emergent resistance in the bacterium suggests
that it may spread rapidly unless new drugs and effective treatment
programs are developed.'

Dr David Livermore, of the Health Protection Agency, said that while
antibiotics were still effective at treating gonorrhea there were
signs of growing resistance to them. 'Our lab tests show that the
bacteria are becoming less sensitive to these cephalosporins, with a
few treatment failures reported,' he added. [See CDC Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report. Cephalosporin Susceptibility Among _Neisseria
gonorrhoeae_ Isolates -- United States, 2000-2010. MMWR 8 Jul 2011 /
60(26); 873-7; available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6026a2.htm.] 'This means
that we are having to change the type of cephalosporin that is used
and to increase the dosage. The worry is that we will see gonorrhea
becoming a much more difficult infection to treat over the next 5
years. Prevention is better than cure, especially as cure becomes
harder, and the most reliable way to protect against sexually
transmitted infections -- including resistant gonorrhea -- is to use a
condom with all new and casual partners.'

The new strain of the sexually transmitted disease called H041 was
found in Japan and leaves doctors with no other option than to try
untested medicines to combat it. Left untreated it can cause
infertility in women and men and can be life threatening if it spreads
to the blood and joints. Some 16 700 Britons are infected with
gonorrhea every year and it is one of the most common STIs [sexually
transmitted infections] after chlamydia. The 16-24 age group accounts
for almost half of all cases.

Rebecca Findlay, from the Family Planning Association, urged wider
use of contraception. 'Prevention is better than cure, especially as
cure becomes harder,' she said. 'Prevention becomes more important
because we know antibiotics won't always work. Gonorrhea can affect
people of all ages and everyone should be now focusing on looking
after their sexual health.'

One of the problems with gonorrhea is that its symptoms take time to
become apparent. Around half of women and 1 in 10 men will not be
aware they have the disease for several months. In women, the
infection can spread to the womb and ovaries and increase the risk of
pelvic inflammatory disease. The very painful condition has been
linked to infertility and ectopic pregnancy, wherein the foetus
develops outside the womb and cannot survive. Men can also develop
infections in the testes and prostate gland, which can reduce their
fertility.

Rates of sexually transmitted infections have increased over the past
decade, although the number of cases has begun to level off. Experts
have blamed increased promiscuity, particularly among the young.

--
Communicated by:
Andrea Jones
All About Resources, Shropshire, SY95AJ
<andrea@allaboutresources.co.uk>

[The HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of Japan can be accessed
at http://healthmap.org/r/008U.

Resistance of _N. gonorrhoeae_ to cefixime, reported in approximately
30 percent isolates in Japan (1), led to withdrawal of cefixime in
Japan for the treatment of gonorrhea (2). Reduced susceptibility to
cefixime was found to be due mostly to an altered penicillin-binding
protein 2 encoded by a mosaic _penA_ gene (3). The mosaic _penA_ gene
was found in several different multilocus sequence types (MLST) of _N.
gonorrhoeae_, although the MLST 7363 was the predominant type (3).

The novel ceftriaxone-resistant _N. gonorrhoeae_, called H041 in the
news releases above, (MIC of ceftriaxone 2 microg/mL) was first
reported in January 2011 (4). H041 was isolated from the pharynx of a
31-year-old female commercial sex worker in Japan. It was also
resistant to penicillin G (4 microg/mL), cefixime (8 microg/mL), and
levofloxacin (32 microg/mL), had reduced susceptibility to
azithromycin (0.5 microg/mL), but was susceptible to spectinomycin (16
microg/mL). Multilocus sequence typing characterized the strain as
MLST 7363, the predominant sequence type among cefixime-resistant
clones (3). Molecular typing suggested that the novel
ceftriaxone-resistant _N. gonorrhoeae_ H041 was derived from the MLST
(multilocus sequence typing) ST7363 cefixime-resistant,
ceftriaxone-susceptible _N. gonorrhoeae_ clone (4). Although the H041
strain did not produce beta-lactamase in a nitrocephin test, further
molecular analysis was needed to elucidate the precise mechanism of
the ceftriaxone resistance in the H041 strain (4).

In the US, CDC now recommends dual therapy for gonorrhea with a
cephalosporin (ceftriaxone 250 mg) plus either azithromycin or
doxycycline (5). No other well-studied and effective antibiotic
treatment options or combinations currently are available. The
emergence of gonococcal cephalosporin resistance would substantially
limit available treatment options (6). Data from the Gonococcal
Isolate Surveillance Project (GISP) document decreasing susceptibility
to extended spectrum cephalosporins among _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolates in
the United States during 2000-2010. During that period, the percentage
of isolates with elevated minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) to
extended spectrum cephalosporins (0.25 microg/mL or higher for
cefixime and 0.125 microg/mL or higher for ceftriaxone) increased from
0.2 percent in 2000 to 1.4 percent in 2010 for cefixime and from 0.1
percent in 2000 to 0.3 percent in 2010 for ceftriaxone (6).

The US CDC anticipates that the eventual emergence of cephalosporin
resistance and that gonococcal resistance to cefixime might emerge in
the United States before resistance to ceftriaxone (6). Effective
treatment of gonorrhea now requires 2 antibiotics. CDC currently is
recommending ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly combined with
azithromycin 1 g orally, rather than doxycycline, as the most
effective treatment for uncomplicated gonorrhea, because of the
2009-2010 isolates with decreased susceptibility to cefixime, none
exhibited decreased susceptibility to azithromycin, and all of them
exhibited tetracycline resistance (6). However, isolates with reduced
azithromycin susceptibility have been reported in the US, the UK, and
Argentina (see the recent ProMED-mail post Antibiotic resistance:
Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA (CA) azithromycin). If a patient
experiences cefixime treatment failure, the CDC recommends that
clinicians should re-treat the patient with 250 mg ceftriaxone
intramuscularly and 2 g azithromycin orally (6).

References
----------
1. Ochiai S, Ishiko H, Yasuda M, Deguchi T: Rapid detection of the
mosaic structure of the _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ _penA_ gene, which is
associated with decreased susceptibilities to oral cephalosporins. J
Clin Microbiol 2008; 46(5): 1804-10. Available at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2395096/.
2. Japanese Society for Sexually Transmitted Diseases. Guidelines for
the diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases 2006. Jpn
J Sex Transm Dis. 2006; 17(Suppl 1): 35-9.
3. Ohnishi M, Watanabe Y, Ono E, et al: Spread of a chromosomal
cefixime-resistant penA gene among different _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_
lineages. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010; 54(3): 1060-7. Available
at http://aac.asm.org/cgi/reprint/54/3/1060.
4. Ohnishi M, Saika T, Hoshina S, et al: Ceftriaxone-resistant
_Neisseria gonorrhoeae_, Japan. Emerg Infect Dis. 2011 Jan; 17(1):
148-9. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/17/1/148.htm.
5. CDC STD Treatment Guidelines 2010. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/gonococcal-infections.htm.
6. CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Cephalosporin
Susceptibility Among _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_ Isolates -- United
States, 2000-2010. MMWR 8 Jul 2011; 60(26): 873-7. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6026a2.htm?s_cid=mm6026a2_w.
- Mod.ML]
See Also
Antibiotic resistance: Neisseria gonorrhoeae - USA (CA) azithromycin 20110613.1800
2007
----
Antibiotic resistance, N. gonorrheae - USA: fluoroquinolones 20070413.1229
2002
----
Gonorrhea, multidrug resistant - USA (CA, HI) 20020510.4150
2000
----
Antibiotic resistance, gonococci - USA: 1999 20001222.2257
Antibiotic resistance, gonococci - UK (Scotland) 20001209.2164
1998
----
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrheae - USA(02) 19980531.1043
Antibiotic resistance, Neisseria gonorrheae - USA 19980401.0603
1996
----
Antibiotic resistance (11): Neisseria gonorrhoeae 19960404.0637
.................................................ml/mj/mpp
</body>
