<header id=032311>
Published Date: 2011-10-05 12:15:12 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed deaths, tigers - Russia: distemper susp.
Archive Number: 20111005.2996
</header>
<body id=032311>
UNDIAGNOSED DEATHS, TIGERS - RUSSIA: DISTEMPER SUSPECTED
********************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Mon 3 Oct 2011
Source: Environment News Service (ENS) [edited]
http://www.ens-newswire.com/ens/oct2011/2011-10-03-02.html


Two wild Amur tiger deaths clue to distemper outbreak
-----------------------------------------------------
Distemper, a virus afflicting domestic dogs and many wildlife species,
appears to be a growing threat to the Amur tigers of Siberia, Russian
and US wildlife veterinary scientists believe.

At the 1st Russian symposium on wildlife diseases taking place this
week in the Russian Far East city of Ussurisk, in the heart of tiger
country, the team presented its evidence.

Last year [2010] a tigress "Galia," studied by Wildlife Conservation
Society [WCS] researchers for 8 years in Sikhote-Alin Biosphere
Reserve in the Russian Far East, walked into the village of Terney.
"Galia displayed abnormal neurologic signs, seemingly unfazed by the
new surrounding, appeared gaunt, and was searching for dogs as an easy
meal", said the scientists. After several capture attempts failed, the
tiger was shot by local police.

In November 2003, a similar event occurred when an otherwise healthy
looking wild tigress walked into the village of Pokrovka in
Khabarovski Krai.

Wildlife Conservation Society staff immobilized the animal and worked
with local Russian veterinarian Evgeny Slabe in treating the tiger,
which later died in captivity.

Samples for the diagnosis of distemper were collected only from these
2 animals. The samples tested positive.

Health experts from Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo,
Primorskaya State Agricultural Academy, and Moscow Zoo now are
collaborating to understand the role of distemper in the disappearance
of Amur, or Siberian, tigers.

The Siberian tiger, _Panthera tigris altaica_, is also known as the
Amur, Manchurian, Altaic, Korean, North China, or Ussuri tiger.
Threatened by habitat loss, fewer than 500 Siberian tigers remain in
the wild.

Amur tigers are the largest big cats in the world. Working at WCS's
Wildlife Health Center at the Bronx Zoo, Russian and WCS scientists
used histology along with DNA and PCR [polymerase chain reaction]
sequencing to confirm and characterize the infection in the 2 wild
Siberian tigers from the Russian Far East.

There have been several other examples of tigers entering villages in
the area or stalling traffic on major roadways in recent years,
behavior that the scientists say could possibly indicate distemper.

But the diagnosis announced today [3 Oct 2011] provides genetic
confirmation of the fact that distemper is impacting wild tigers,
which WCS and Russian colleagues first documented in 2003.

Anatoly Astafiev, director of Sikhote-Alin Reserve, said, "We have
seen a fall in tiger numbers within our reserve, so it is very
important to know that at least one of the causes is a recognizable
disease, something we may be able to address and potentially
prevent."

Distemper is found worldwide in domestic dogs and has caused infection
and death in wild species such as lynx and bobcats in Canada, Baikal
seals in Russia, lions in the Serengeti ecosystem in Africa, and
raccoons and the endangered black-footed ferret in the United States.

Canine distemper in domestic dogs is controlled through vaccination.
In Africa, massive vaccination campaigns of dogs in villages
surrounding the Serengeti appear to have been effective in reducing
the disease's impact on lions.

The scientists are still uncertain about how the Amur tigers may have
contracted the disease and whether it originated in another wild
animal species or domestic dogs, both of which can act as reservoirs
for the infection.

Dr Denise McAloose, WCS's chief pathologist and leader of the
investigation, said, "This is a great example of what international
collaboration can achieve. Without our Russian associates there on the
spot, knowing what samples to collect and how to preserve these
specimens, samples would never have made it to our lab, and the cause
of death would remain unknown. It's great that we're all here together
to work on this issue as a team."

WCS is working with staff from the Primorskaya Agriculture Academy and
other partners to establish a wildlife lab in Ussurisk to facilitate
local diagnostic testing of Amur tigers, although it will take several
years until the lab is funded and fully functional. "Until then,"
McAloose said, "there's still much to do including identifying the
source of the disease."

"This exchange provides a foundation for elucidating potential disease
threats to tigers in the Russian Far East," said Irina Korotkova of
the Primorskaya Agricultural Academy. "Understanding the role of
distemper in our wild Amur tiger population is vitally important."

In Ussurisk, the symposium participants are linking the science of
wildlife health with wildlife conservation efforts. The Russian and US
scientists hope to use their collaboration to develop health measures
that can counter this latest threat to the world's largest cat.

"With all the threats facing Siberian tigers from poaching and habitat
loss, relatively little research has been done on diseases that may
afflict tigers," said Dale Miquelle, WCS Director of Russia Programs.
"There are no records of tigers entering villages and behaving so
abnormally before 2000, so this appears to be a new development and
new threat," said Miquelle. "Understanding whether disease is a major
source of mortality for Siberian tigers is crucial for future
conservation efforts."

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The pathogen flow at the carnivore wildlife-domestic interface is a
major conservation concern, especially where feral/uncontrolled dogs
and cats are abundant. Documentation of outbreaks in wild carnivores
due to exposure to cat and dog pathogens abound throughout the world.
Molecular studies comparing the degree of identity between the virus
found in the dead tigers and that circulating in local dogs might shed
light on the origin of the disease.

It is important to consider that canine distemper is not the only
pathogen that domestic carnivores can transmit to tigers, and thus
conservation efforts should take into account all infectious agents
that are potentially flowing at the carnivore wildlife-domestic
interface in the region.

Amur tigers are classified as endangered by the International Union
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species
http://www.iucnredlist.org/apps/redlist/details/15956/0.

For a picture of the Amur tiger (_Panthera tigris altaica_) see
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2007/04/images/070419-tiger-picture.jpg.
- Mod.PMB]
See Also
Tigers, undiagnosed mortality - Russia: Siberia, RFI 20100622.2088
Canine distemper, wildlife - USA (06): (NY) fox 20101219.4476
Canine distemper, wildlife - Canada: (ON) raccoon 20101016.3748
.................................................sb/pmb/mj/lm
</body>
