<header id=041259>
Published Date: 2008-06-26 17:00:27 EDT
Subject: PRO/EDR> Influenza activity update, 2007/2008 - USA & worldwide
Archive Number: 20080626.1975
</header>
<body id=041259>
INFLUENZA ACTIVITY UPDATE, 2007/2008 - USA AND WORLDWIDE
***********************************************
A ProMED-mail post
<http://www.promedmail.org>
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
<http://www.isid.org>

Date: Fri 27 Jun 2008
Source: MMWR Weekly, 57(25); 692-697, 2008 [abbreviated, edited]
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5725a5.htm?s_cid=mm5725a5_e>


During the 2007-2008 influenza season, influenza activity* peaked in
mid-February 2008 in the United States and was associated with
greater mortality and higher rates of hospitalization of children
aged 0-4 years, compared with each of the previous 3 seasons. In the
United States, influenza A (H1N1) was the predominant strain early in
the season; influenza A (H3N2) viruses increased in circulation in
January 2008 and predominated overall. While influenza A (H1N1), A
(H3N2), and B viruses cocirculated worldwide, influenza A (H1N1)
viruses were most commonly reported in Canada, Europe, and Africa,
and influenza B viruses were predominant in most Asian countries.
This report summarizes influenza activity in the United States and
worldwide during the 2007-2008 influenza season (30 Sep 2007 to 17
May 2008).

Overview of Influenza Activity in the United States
--------------------------------------
The national percentage of respiratory specimens that tested positive
for influenza peaked in early to mid-February 2008, and the
proportion of outpatient visits to sentinel providers for
influenza-like illness (ILI) and to BioSense Department of Veteran's
Affairs (VA) and Department of Defense (DoD) outpatient clinics for
acute respiratory illness (ARI) peaked in mid-February 2008.

Viral Surveillance
-------------------
During 30 Sep 2007 to 17 May 2008, World Health Organization (WHO)
and National Respiratory and Enteric Virus Surveillance System
collaborating laboratories in the United States tested 225 329
specimens for influenza viruses; 39 827 (18 percent) were positive
[illustrated by a figure in the original text]. Of the positive
specimens, 28 263 (71 percent) were influenza A viruses, and 11 564
(29 percent) were influenza B viruses. Among the influenza A viruses,
8290 (29 percent) were subtyped; 2175 (26 percent) were influenza A
(H1N1), and 6115 (74 percent) were influenza A (H3N2) viruses. The
proportion of specimens testing positive for influenza 1st exceeded
10 percent during the week ending 12 Jan 2008 (week 2), peaked at 32
percent during the week ending 9 Feb 2008 (week 6), and declined to
<10 percent during the week ending 19 Apr 2008 (week 16). The
proportion positive was above 10 percent for 14 consecutive weeks.
The peak percentage of specimens testing positive for influenza
during the previous 3 seasons ranged from 22 percent to 34 percent,
and the peak occurred during mid-February to early March 2008 (1).
During the previous 3 influenza seasons, the number of consecutive
weeks during which more than 10 percent of specimens tested positive
for influenza ranged from 13 to 17 weeks (1).

During the 2007-2008 influenza season, more influenza A viruses than
influenza B viruses were identified in all surveillance regions;
however, the predominant influenza A virus varied by region.
Influenza A (H1N1) was most commonly reported in 2 of the 9
surveillance regions (Mountain and Pacific), and influenza A (H3N2)
was most commonly reported in the remaining 7 surveillance regions
(East North Central, East South Central, Mid-Atlantic, New England,
South Atlantic, West North Central, and West South Central).

Antigenic Characterization
--------------------------
Since 30 Sep 2007, CDC has antigenically characterized 1161 influenza
viruses collected by U.S. laboratories: 407 influenza A (H1N1)
viruses, 404 influenza A (H3N2) viruses, and 350 influenza B viruses.
Of the 407 influenza A (H1N1) viruses, 270 (66 percent) were
characterized as antigenically similar to A/Solomon Islands/3/2006,
the influenza A (H1N1) component of the 2007-2008 Northern Hemisphere
influenza vaccine. 116 (29 percent) viruses were characterized as
A/Brisbane/59/2007-like. Of the 404 influenza A (H3N2) viruses, 91
(23 percent) were characterized as similar to A/Wisconsin/ 67/2005,
the influenza A (H3N2) component of the 2007-2008 Northern Hemisphere
influenza vaccine. 243 (60 percent) viruses were characterized as
A/Brisbane/10/2007-like.

Influenza B viruses currently circulating can be divided into 2
antigenically distinct lineages represented by B/Victoria/02/87 and
B/ Yamagata/16/88 viruses. Of the 350 influenza B viruses
characterized, 342 (98 percent) were identified as belonging to the
B/Yamagata lineage, and 304 (89 percent) of these viruses were
similar to B/Florida/4/2006. The remaining 8 (2 percent) of the 350
influenza B viruses characterized belong to the B/Victoria lineage;
of these, 6 (75 percent) were similar to B/Ohio/01/2005, an antigenic
equivalent to B/Malaysia/2506/2004, the influenza B component for the
2007-2008 Northern Hemisphere influenza vaccine.

Resistance to Antiviral Medications
------------------------------------
In the United States, 2 classes of antiviral drugs are approved by
the Food and Drug Administration for use in treating or preventing
influenza virus infections: neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir and
zanamivir) and adamantanes (amantadine and rimantidine). During the
2007-2008 influenza season, a small increase in the number of
influenza viruses resistant to the neuraminidase inhibitor
oseltamivir was observed. All of the oseltamivir-resistant viruses
were influenza A (H1N1) isolates that shared a single genetic
mutation (H274Y, N2 neuraminidase molecule numbering) (2) that
confers oseltamivir resistance. Among specimens collected since 1 Oct
2007, 111 (10.9 percent) of the 1020 influenza A (H1N1) viruses
tested were found to be resistant to oseltamivir, an increase from 4
(0.7 percent) of 588 influenza A (H1N1) viruses tested during the
2006-2007 season. No resistance to oseltamivir was identified among
the 444 influenza A (H3N2) or 305 influenza B viruses tested. All
tested viruses were sensitive to zanamivir. Adamantane resistance
continues to be high among influenza A (H3N2) viruses, with 524 (99.8
percent) of 525 influenza A (H3N2) viruses tested being resistant to
the adamantanes. Adamantane resistance among influenza A (H1N1)
viruses has been detected at a lower level. Of the 918 influenza A
(H1N1) viruses tested, 98 (10.7 percent) were resistant to the
adamantanes. None of the oseltamivir-resistant influenza A (H1N1)
viruses identified during the 2007-2008 season were resistant to
adamantanes.

Outpatient Illness Surveillance
------------------------------
The weekly percentage of patient visits to U.S. sentinel providers
for ILI met or exceeded national baseline levels (2.2 percent) during
the weeks ending 29 Dec 2007 to 22 Mar 2008 (weeks 52-12) and peaked
at 6.0 percent for the week ending 23 Feb 2008 (week 7) [illustrated
by a figure in the original text]. During the previous 3 influenza
seasons, the peak percentage of patient visits for ILI ranged from
3.2 percent to 5.4 percent and occurred during mid-February to early
March (1). The weekly percentage of visits to VA and DoD BioSense
outpatient clinics for ARI was at or above national baseline levels
(3.2 percent) during the weeks ending 29 Dec 2007-5 Jan 2008 (weeks
52-1), and 2 Feb-1 Mar 2008 (weeks 5-9). Outpatient clinic visits for
ARI peaked twice, once at 3.7 percent during the week ending 29 Dec
2007 (week 52), and again at 3.7 percent for the week ending 23 Feb
2008 (week 8). During the previous 3 influenza seasons, the peak
percentage of patient visits for ARI has ranged from 3.4 percent to
4.5 percent and occurred during mid to late February. The increase in
the percentage of visits for ILI and ARI during the week ending 29
Dec 2007 (week 52) might have been influenced by a reduction in
routine healthcare visits during the holiday season, as has occurred
during previous seasons.

State-Specific Activity Levels
-------------------------------
State and territorial epidemiologists report the geographic
distribution of influenza in their state through a weekly influenza
activity code.*** The geographic distribution of influenza activity
peaked during the weeks ending 16 and 23 Feb 2008 (weeks 7 and 8),
when 49 states reported widespread activity, and one state reported
regional activity. All 50 states reported widespread influenza
activity for at least 2 weeks during the 2007-2008 season. No state
reported widespread influenza activity during the weeks ending 26
Apr-17 May 2008 (weeks 17-20). The peak number of states reporting
widespread or regional activity during the previous 3 seasons has
ranged from 41 to 48 states (1).

Influenza-Associated Pediatric Hospitalization
-------------------------------------
Pediatric hospitalizations associated with laboratory-confirmed
influenza infections are monitored in 2 population-based surveillance
networks: the Emerging Infections Program (EIP) and the New Vaccine
Surveillance Network (NVSN). During 30 Sep 2007 to 3 May 2008, the
preliminary influenza-associated hospitalization rate reported by EIP
for children aged 0-17 years was 1.54 per 10 000. For children aged
0-4 years and 5-17 years, the rate was 4.03 per 10 000 and 0.55 per
10 000, respectively. During 4 Nov 2007-3 May 2008, the preliminary
laboratory-confirmed influenza-associated hospitalization rate for
children aged 0-4 years in NVSN was 7.00 per 10 000. Rate estimates
are preliminary and are subject to change as data are finalized.

The end-of-season hospitalization rate for NVSN in the previous 3
seasons ranged from 3.5 (2006-2007) to 7.0 (2004-2005) per 10 000
children aged 0-4 years. The end-of-season hospitalization rate for
EIP in the previous 3 seasons ranged from 2.5 (2006-2007) to 3.8
(2005-2006) per 10 000 children aged 0-4 years. The end-of-season
hospitalization rate for EIP in the previous 3 seasons ranged from
0.3 (2006-2007) to 0.6 (2004-2005) per 10 000 children aged 5-17
years. Differences in rate estimates between the NVSN and EIP systems
are likely the result of different case-finding methods, diagnostic
tests used, and the populations monitored.

Pneumonia- and Influenza-Related Mortality
-------------------------------------
During the 2007-2008 influenza season, the percentage of deaths
attributed to pneumonia and influenza (P&I) exceeded the epidemic
threshold for 19 consecutive weeks in the 122 Cities Mortality
Reporting System during the weeks ending 12 Jan-17 May 2008 (weeks
2-20) [illustrated by a figure in the original text]. The percentage
of P&I deaths peaked at 9.1 percent during the week ending 15 Mar
2008 (week 11). During the previous 3 influenza seasons, the peak
percentage of P&I deaths has ranged from 7.7 percent to 8.9 percent,
and the total number of weeks the P&I ratio exceeded the epidemic
threshold has ranged from one to 11 (1). The P&I baseline and
epidemic threshold values are projected for each season at the onset
of that season and are based on data from the previous 5 years.
Because 3 of the 5 seasons used to calculate baseline and epidemic
threshold values for the 2007-2008 season were mild, failure of the
percentage of P&I deaths to return to baseline levels by the end of
the 2007-2008 season might have resulted from lowering of the
baseline values or from changes occurring in the 122 Cities Mortality
data as reporting sites apply newer data management methods.

Influenza-Related Pediatric Mortality
-------------------------------
As of 29 Jun 2008, 83 deaths associated with influenza infections
that occurred among children aged <18 years during the 2007-2008
influenza season were reported to CDC. These deaths were reported
from 33 states (Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Nevada,
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina,
Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin). All patients had
laboratory-confirmed influenza virus infection. Among the 83 cases,
the mean and median age was 6.4 years and 5.0 years, respectively; 9
children were aged <6 months, 15 were aged 6-23 months, 11 were aged
2-4 years, and 48 were aged 5-17 years. Of the 79 cases for which the
influenza virus type was known, 51 were influenza A viruses, 27 were
influenza B viruses, and one had co-infection with influenza A and B
viruses. Of the 63 cases aged >6 months for whom vaccination status
was known, 58 (92 percent) had not been vaccinated against influenza
according to the 2007 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) recommendations (3). These data are provisional and subject to
change as more information becomes available.

Overview of Influenza Activity Worldwide
-------------------------------------
During the 2007-2008 influenza season, influenza A (H1N1), A (H3N2),
and B viruses cocirculated worldwide. Influenza A viruses were more
commonly reported in Canada and Europe, with influenza A (H1N1)
viruses more common than influenza A (H3N2) viruses, while in Africa,
small numbers of influenza A and B viruses were reported. In Asia,
influenza A (H1N1) and influenza A (H3N2) viruses circulated at lower
levels than influenza B, which predominated in most Asian countries.
Although influenza A (H1N1) was most commonly reported during the
season overall in Europe, influenza B viruses circulated at high
levels and predominated circulation for the season overall in some
countries. Additional information on global influenza circulation is
available at
<http://www.who.int/csr/disease/influenza/influenzanetwork/en/index.html>.

[Reported by: WHO Collaborating Center for Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and Control of Influenza. S Epperson, MPH, L Blanton,
MPH, R Dhara, MPH, L Brammer, MPH, L Finelli, DrPH, M Okomo-Adhiambo,
PhD, L Gubareva, PhD, T Wallis, MS, X Xu, MD, J Bresee, MD, A Klimov,
PhD, N Cox, PhD, Influenza Div, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, CDC.]

MMWR Editorial Note
---------------------
During the 2007-2008 season, influenza activity in the United States
peaked in mid-February 2008. In comparison with the previous 3
seasons, the most recent season had a severity similar to the
2004-2005 influenza season, as determined by the percentage of deaths
resulting from pneumonia and influenza, pediatric hospitalization
rates, and the percentage of visits to outpatient clinics for ILI. In
the United States, influenza A (H1N1), A (H3N2), and B viruses
cocirculated throughout the season. The predominant virus varied by
week, but influenza A (H3N2) viruses were most commonly reported for
the season overall. Early in the season, from October 2007 to
mid-January 2008, influenza A (H1N1) was the most commonly reported
subtype. Influenza A (H3N2) viruses were identified most frequently
during the peak of the season from late January to mid-March 2008. In
the latter part of the season, from late March through May 2008, when
overall activity was declining, more influenza B than influenza A
viruses were reported.

In the United States, the majority of influenza A (H3N2) and
influenza B viruses sent to CDC for further antigenic
characterization were not matched optimally to the 2007-2008 Northern
Hemisphere influenza vaccine strains, while the majority of influenza
A (H1N1) viruses were similar to the vaccine strain. Interim results
from a study carried out this season with the Marshfield Clinic in
Wisconsin found an overall vaccine effectiveness of 44 percent, with
58 percent effectiveness against the predominant influenza A (H3N2)
viruses, but no effectiveness against influenza B (4). These
preliminary results indicate that vaccination provided substantial
protection against influenza in the study population, even though
circulating strains were antigenically distinct from vaccine strains.
These results are consistent with studies conducted during previous
influenza seasons indicating that vaccination provides measurable
protection against laboratory-confirmed influenza, even when vaccine
strains are not matched optimally to circulating strains (5).

Although influenza activity in the United States during the summer
months is typically low, isolated cases and sporadic outbreaks of
influenza, including sporadic cases of human infection with swine
influenza, can occur during the summer. Public health laboratories
are requested to submit summer isolates and any samples that cannot
be subtyped by standard methods, or isolates that are otherwise
unusual, to CDC for further antigenic characterization for influenza
vaccine strain selection, antiviral resistance monitoring, and
identification of novel influenza A viruses.

In February 2008, ACIP voted to expand influenza vaccination
recommendations to include all children aged 5-18 years, beginning
with the 2008-2009 influenza season, if feasible, but no later than
the 2009-2010 influenza season. The influenza vaccine supply is
projected to be abundant for the upcoming influenza season in the
United States, with ample doses available for implementation of the
new pediatric influenza vaccination recommendation. Continued
efforts, however, are needed to improve influenza vaccination
coverage among children aged 6 months through 4 years, an age group
at high risk for influenza-related complications and hospitalization,
and close contacts of all children aged <5 years (9,10). Vaccination
of household contacts of children aged <6 months is particularly
important, because children aged <6 months are the pediatric group at
highest risk for influenza complications, but no vaccine is available
for this age group. High rates of laboratory confirmed
influenza-associated hospitalization reported from the 2
population-based surveillance systems for children aged 0-4 years,
and the low vaccination rate among influenza-associated pediatric
deaths reported to CDC, highlight the increased risk for
influenza-related complications and hospitalizations in young
children and the need to improve vaccine coverage in this age group.

Healthcare providers should offer vaccination, whether individually
or through mass campaigns, soon after the 2008-2009 vaccine is
available. All children aged 6 months through 8 years who previously
have not received influenza vaccine should have their 1st dose
administered as soon as vaccine is available to allow time for a 2nd
dose before or shortly after the onset of influenza activity in their
community. Influenza activity in the United States rarely peaks
before November, and activity has peaked in January or later in 20
(80 percent) of the previous 25 influenza seasons. Thus, vaccine
administered in December or later is likely to be beneficial during
most influenza seasons. Additional information regarding influenza
viruses, influenza surveillance, avian influenza, and influenza
vaccination recommendations is available at
<http://www.cdc.gov/flu>.

References
----------
(1) CDC. Update: influenza activity---United States, September 30,
2007--April 5, 2008, and composition of the 2008--09 influenza
vaccine. MMWR 2008;57:404--9.

(2) Colman PM. Neuramindase: enzyme and antigen. In: Krug RM, ed. The
influenza viruses. New York, NY: Plenum Press; 1989:175--210.

(3) CDC. Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2007. MMWR
2007;56(No. RR-6).

(4) Edwards KM, DuPont WD, Westrich MK, Plummer WD, Palmer PS, Wright
PF. A randomized controlled trial of cold-adapted and inactivated
influenza vaccines for the prevention on influenza A disease. J
Infect Dis 1994;169:68--76.

(5) CDC. Interim within-season estimate of the effectiveness of
trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine---Marshfield, Wisconsin,
2007--08 influenza season. MMWR 2008;57:393--8.

(6) CDC. Influenza-associated pediatric mortality and the increase of
Staphylococcus aureus co-infection. Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2007. Available
at
<http://www2a.cdc.gov/han/archivesys/viewmsgv.asp?alertnum=00259>.

(7) CDC. Influenza-associated pediatric mortality and Staphylococcus
aureus co-infection. Atlanta, Georgia: CDC; 2008. Available at
<http://www2a.cdc.gov/han/archivesys/viewmsgv.asp?alertnum=00268>.

(8) CDC. Influenza antiviral use for persons at high risk for
influenza complications or who have severe influenza illness.
Atlanta, GA: CDC; 2008. Available at
<http://www2a.cdc.gov/han/ archivesys/viewmsgv.asp?alertnum=00271>.

(9) CDC. Childhood influenza vaccination coverage---United States,
2004--05 influenza season. MMWR 2006;55:1062--5.

(10) CDC. Early release of selected estimates based on data from the
January--September 2007 National Health Interview Survey.
Hyattsville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC,
National Center for Health Statistics; 2008. Available at
<http:// www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhis/earlyrelease/200803_04.pdf>.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[The encouraging and significant conclusions from the above report
are consistent with studies conducted during previous influenza
seasons indicating that vaccination provides measurable protection
against laboratory-confirmed influenza, even when vaccine strains are
not matched optimally to circulating strains.

However, the low vaccination rate among influenza-associated
pediatric deaths highlight the increased risk for influenza-related
complications and hospitalizations in young children and the need to
improve vaccine coverage in this age group.

The global surveillance data indicate that there are significant
differences in the frequencies of the H1N1 and H3N2 serotypes of
influenza virus and the influenza B viruses circulating in North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. This situation remains to be
elucidated.

The European Influenza Surveillance Scheme (EISS) provides
continuously updated epidemiological and virological data for Europe
and can be accessed at:
<http://www.eiss.org/index.cgi>.
- Mod.CP]
See Also
Influenza, pediatric mortality: CDC notice 20080202.0426
Influenza, prison - USA (02): (CA) 20080311.0984
Influenza, prison - USA: (CA) 20080309.0965
Influenza A (H1N1) virus, oseltamivir resistance.... 20080129.0371
Influenza A (H1N1) virus, oseltamivir resistance.... 20080128.0361
Influenza virus, 2007/2008 vaccine mismatch 20080209.0529
Influenza virus, oseltamivir resistance (06): Japan 20080228.0812
Influenza virus, transmissibility determinants 20080220.0689
2007
----
Influenza update - USA & worldwide 20070928.3217
Influenza: update & vaccine composition 20070810.2607
......................................cp/msp/lm


*##########################################################*
************************************************************
ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that
are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the
information, and of any statements or opinions based
thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in
using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID
and its associated service providers shall not be held
responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any
damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted
or archived material.
************************************************************
Become a ProMED-mail Premium Subscriber at
<http://www.isid.org/ProMEDMail_Premium.shtml>
************************************************************
Visit ProMED-mail's web site at <http://www.promedmail.org>.
Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org

(NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your
full name and affiliation, it may not be posted. Send
commands to subscribe/unsubscribe, get archives, help,
etc. to: majordomo@promedmail.org. For assistance from a
human being send mail to: owner-promed@promedmail.org.

############################################################
############################################################
</body>
