<header id=055628>
Published Date: 2011-11-01 06:00:00 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (11): (SD,PA)
Archive Number: 20111101.3243
</header>
<body id=055628>
EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA (11): (SOUTH DAKOTA,
PENNSYLVANIA)
*******************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

In this posting:
[1] South Dakota
[2] Pennsylvania

******
[1] South Dakota
Date: Thu 27 Oct 2011
Source: KCAU-TV, Associated Press (AP) report [edited]
http://www.kcautv.com/story/15888102/sd-hunters-asked-to-report-signs-of-deer-disease


South Dakota wildlife officials are asking hunters to watch for and
report signs of disease in white-tailed deer. Game, Fish and Parks
officials say they have confirmed a few cases of the disease known as
EHD [epizootic hemorrhagic disease] that's transmitted by midges and
is deadly to white-tailed deer. Biologists are trying to determine the
extent of the disease in South Dakota.

There have been outbreaks of EHD in other states this year [2011],
including North Dakota and Montana. In North Dakota, it prompted
wildlife officials earlier this month [October 2011] to suspend the
sale of some hunting licenses and offer refunds to the holders of
thousands more.

Wildlife biologist Steve Griffin in Rapid City says the main South
Dakota counties affected so far appear to be Sully, Hughes, Stanley,
Jones, Lyman, and Tripp.

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[South Dakota can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive
map at http://healthmap.org/r/1ob8. The counties mentioned can be
seen on the map at
http://www.digital-topo-maps.com/county-map/south-dakota.shtml. -
Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

******
[2] Pennsylvania
Date: Fri 28 Oct 2011
Source: Public Opinion Online [edited]
http://www.publicopiniononline.com/localnews/ci_19211950


A disease that killed a large number of Pennsylvania deer in 2007 may
have been present in Franklin County this year [2011]. However, the
Pennsylvania Game Commission said the disease is not likely to have a
major impact on the local deer population this year.

Pennsylvania Game Commission spokesman Jerry Feaser said evidence
suggests that a deer recently found in Franklin County died from
epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus, though this has not been
confirmed.

Hemorrhagic disease is one of the most common diseases of white-tailed
deer in the eastern US and can cause a significant number of deaths
during outbreaks, according to the game commission.

There was an outbreak of EHD in Pennsylvania most recently in 2007,
which resulted in a large number of deer deaths, primarily in the
southwestern part of the state.

This year [2011], there have been 2 confirmed cases, one in Erie
County and another in Northampton County.

Tests to confirm the disease have to be done very shortly after the
deer's death, and Feaser said the sample of the deer from Franklin
County was not recent enough to provide conclusive evidence.

"It sure showed signs of EHD and we strongly suspect it was EHD,"
Feaser said. "Given the fact that it was confirmed in other parts of
the state, it's likely that's what it was."

That's not necessarily cause for concern. This year [2011], there have
been few cases compared to the previous outbreak, and the insects that
transmit the disease are wiped out by the 1st frost.

The National Weather Service placed Franklin County and surrounding
areas under a freeze watch today [28 Oct 2011]. The game commission
said hemorrhagic disease can be caused by 2 closely related viruses --
EHD virus and the bluetongue virus.

Signs include swelling of face or neck, respiratory distress, fever,
ulcers in the mouth, swollen blue tongues, or hoof overgrowth.

The viruses are not known to cause disease in humans, though the game
commission recommends if you suspect a deer is diseased, don't eat the
meat.

Feaser said the disease is more common in the Southeast and it is
believed the insects, not native to Pennsylvania, will travel along
weather fronts that sweep up from southeast. [Since Hurricane Irene
(August 2011) swept other insects northward, it is interesting that
Pennsylvania seems to have escaped some of the insect related
diseases. - Mod.TG]

When the disease does arrive in Pennsylvania, Feaser said it can be
"fairly fatal fairly quickly."

In 2007, the virus appeared in August, leaving more time to afflict
deer populations before the 1st frost. Thousands of deer died. There
was also an outbreak in 2002, though it was not as severe.

[Byline: Marcus Rauhut]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail from HealthMap alerts
<promed@promedmail.org>

[Pennsylvania can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive
map at http://healthmap.org/r/1ob9. The counties mentioned can be
seen on the map at
http://www.digital-topo-maps.com/county-map/pennsylvania.shtml. -
Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

[Epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) is one of the most important
diseases of deer in North America. The epizootic hemorrhagic disease
viruses (EHDV) are widespread in white-tailed deer and periodically
cause serious epidemics in wild populations.

Some of these viruses can also cause disease in cattle. In the US, EHD
in cattle is uncommon, rarely fatal, and usually associated with an
epidemic in deer. However, an EHDV serogroup virus called the Ibaraki
virus causes serious epidemics in Japan, Korea, and Taiwan that may
affect as many as 39 000 cattle. The disease caused by the Ibaraki
virus is known as Ibaraki disease; some authorities consider it to be
a synonym for epizootic hemorrhagic disease in cattle.

The epizootic hemorrhagic disease viruses belong to the genus
_Orbivirus_, family Reoviridae. 10 serotypes of EHDV are known
worldwide.

The Ibaraki virus is closely related to EHDV. According to some
authors, it is a distinct virus belonging to the EHDV serogroup.
According to others, the Ibaraki virus and the Australian (but not the
American) EHDV serotype 2 are nearly identical topotypes. There is
more than one strain of the Ibaraki virus.

The epizootic hemorrhagic disease viruses can infect most wild and
domestic ruminants. Clinical signs are seen mainly in white-tailed
deer, with mule deer and pronghorn antelope affected to a lesser
extent. Other wild animals found to be seropositive include
black-tailed deer, red deer, wapiti, fallow deer, and roe deer. Rare
outbreaks of EHD have been reported in cattle. Sheep can be infected
experimentally but rarely develop clinical signs, and goats do not
seem to be susceptible to infection. Ibaraki disease is seen in
cattle.

Three syndromes may be seen in deer. Peracute disease is characterized
by high fever, anorexia, weakness, respiratory distress, and severe
and rapid edema of the head and neck. Swelling of the tongue and
conjunctivae is common. Deer with the peracute form usually die
rapidly, typically within 8-36 hours; some animals may be found dead
with few clinical signs. In the acute form (classical EHD), these
signs may be accompanied by extensive hemorrhages in many tissues
including the skin, heart, and gastrointestinal tract. There is often
excessive salivation and nasal discharge, which may both be
blood-tinged. Animals with the acute form can also develop ulcers or
erosions of the tongue, dental pad, palate, rumen, and omasum. High
mortality rates are common in both the peracute and acute forms.

In the US, EHD rarely affects cattle, but bluetongue virus does affect
cattle. While these diseases are closely related, there are minor
differences.

Bluetongue is an insect-borne viral disease of ruminants. Among
domestic animals, clinical disease occurs most often in sheep, and can
result in significant morbidity. Affected sheep may have erosions and
ulcerations on the mucous membranes, dyspnea, or lameness from muscle
necrosis and inflammation of the coronary band. Some sheep may slough
their hooves, and surviving animals can lose part or all of their
wool. Some strains of the virus can result in mortality rates as high
as 70 percent in highly susceptible sheep.

Infections in cattle are usually subclinical; often, the only signs of
disease are changes in the leukocyte count and a fluctuation in rectal
temperature. Rarely, cattle have mild hyperemia, vesicles, or ulcers
in the mouth; hyperemia around the coronary band; hyperesthesia; or a
vesicular and ulcerative dermatitis. The skin may develop thick folds,
particularly in the cervical region. The external nares may contain
erosions and a crusty exudate. Temporary sterility may be seen in
bulls. Infected cows can give birth to calves with hydranencephaly or
cerebral cysts. Cattle that have clinically apparent disease may
develop severe breaks in the hooves several weeks after infection;
such breaks are usually followed by foot rot. Infections in goats are
usually subclinical, and similar to disease in cattle.

The vast majority of infections with bluetongue are clinically
inapparent. In a percentage of infected sheep and occasionally other
ruminants, more severe disease can occur.

In deer, the differential diagnosis includes foot-and-mouth disease,
bluetongue, and plant photosensitization. A hemorrhagic disease caused
by an adenovirus has also been described in deer in California.

So just from this short introduction into these 2 diseases, there are
similarities but there are also subtle differences in clinical signs.

Portions of this comment have been extracted from
http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/epizootic_hemorrhagic_disease.pdf
and http://www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Factsheets/pdfs/bluetongue.pdf. -
Mod.TG]
See Also
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (10): (MD) 20111028.320
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (09): (ND,MT) 20111021.3137
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (08): (MI) 20111004.2986
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (07): (MI) 20110921.2870
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (06): (NJ, PA) 2 00110918.2842
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (05): (NY) 20110911.2767
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (04): (NJ) 20110911.2762
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (03): (KS,MT) 20110904.2704
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (02): (NJ) 20110826.2601
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease, cervids - USA (MT) 20110820.2529
.................................................sb/tg/mj/mpp
</body>
