<header id=015224>
Published Date: 2011-12-14 05:35:05 EST
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Undiagnosed disease, bovine - New Zealand: (TK), salmonella, RFI
Archive Number: 20111214.3589
</header>
<body id=015224>
UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE, BOVINE - NEW ZEALAND: (TARANAKI), SALMONELLA,
REQUEST FOR INFORMATION
******************************************************************************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: Tue 13 Dec 2011
Source: Stuff.co.NZ [edited]
http://www.stuff.co.nz/taranaki-daily-news/news/6129273/Cattle-disease-puzzle-for-vets


Taranaki dairy farmers are losing stock -- and thousands of dollars --
as vets tackle a severe outbreak of salmonella. The outbreak has
stumped the vets, and they may bring in an epidemiologist to
investigate it. To date farmers have lost more than 20 cows, and
hundreds have been infected.

Kaponga vet Guy Oakley said nothing had emerged as a common factor.
"We can't reject anything. It's incredibly frustrating."

Information was being shared among clinics in an effort to find a
common thread. "We're trying to find funding for someone to look at
the information we have and make sense of it. Nothing has emerged as a
common factor." Dr Oakley said the disease was highly contagious and
he knew of 3 people who had caught it.

It has affected herds in the Pihama-Awatuna area in South Taranaki and
the Stratford-Midhirst district. Cows in at least 8 herds have caught
salmonella this season, twice as many as last year [2010].

In the Stratford-Midhirst area there have been 3 confirmed cases.
Another possible case had cleared without treatment. In one herd 200
animals were affected and in the other 2 herds, 60-100 animals caught
the disease.

In the Pihama area, between 80 and 90 animals in one 500-cow herd have
caught salmonella and animals in 3 other herds have also had it this
season [2011].

In the past, the disease had occurred in only 1 or 2 animals in a herd
but the current outbreak had affected many, Dr Oakley, of Coastal
Veterinary Services, said.

The disease was devastating for farmers who had to treat affected cows
with antibiotics, withdraw them from milking during and after
treatment, and vaccinate the rest of the herd.

Those cows that recovered came back into milk and resumed full
production with no apparent ill effects, although that could take
time.

One farmer last year [2010] had spent NZS 10 000 [about USD 7500] on
drugs for his herd, and also faced substantial production losses, he
said.

Like Dr Oakley, Stratford vet Craig Hassell is puzzled by the
outbreak. The 2 vets are recommending vaccination, even though one
farmer whose herd had been vaccinated had subsequently had 90 cows
with salmonella. Dr Hassell said while vaccination might not be 100
percent successful, it would reduce the severity of the disease in any
animals that caught it. Farmers with salmonella in the herd should
advise Fonterra [multinational dairy company], he said. Dr Oakley said
vets did not know what the risk factors of the current outbreak were.

"So to be absolutely safe, vaccination is the only tool. We don't know
what's behind the outbreak," he said.

"Our conjectures have crumbled after investigations."

[Byline: Sue O'Dowd]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail
<promed@promedmail.org>

[The article does not tell us specifically what genus and species of
salmonella is affecting these animals. Neither does it tell us what
antibiotics the organism is susceptible too. We do know there is a
vaccine. So if there is a vaccine, they must know the name of the
organism responsible for the outbreak. The article mentions people
affected but provides no details regarding recuperation, or
hospitalization.

This article is very odd in that it leaves many questions. While
vaccinations are rarely 100 percent effective, it is still a valuable
too in saving individuals.

Clearly more information would be helpful on this case. - Mod.TG]

[A HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map of New Zealand can be seen at
http://healthmap.org/r/1xir. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ]

.................................................sb/tg/mj/dk
</body>
