<header id=054254>
Published Date: 2011-09-11 11:24:44 EDT
Subject: PRO/AH/EDR> Strangles, equine - USA: (MI)
Archive Number: 20110911.2764
</header>
<body id=054254>
STRANGLES, EQUINE - USA: (MICHIGAN)
***********************************

A ProMED-mail post
http://www.promedmail.org
ProMED-mail is a program of the
International Society for Infectious Diseases
http://www.isid.org

Date: 9 Sep 2011
Source: Livingston Daily [edited]
http://www.livingstondaily.com/article/20110909/NEWS01/109090313


Several horses at the Brighton Recreation Area's riding stable have
come down with a bacterial infection called equine strangles, causing
the stable to be quarantined for what will likely be 4 weeks to 6
weeks and possibly into November 2011.

According to stable operator Christy Wilson, the infection, also known
as equine distemper, was 1st diagnosed in a horse by veterinarian
Alyssa Connolly on Tuesday [6 Sep 2011] after the horse exhibited
signs of the infection on Labor Day [5 Sep 2011]. Wilson said "all
signs point" to the infection being strangles, but added that lab
results from tests taken Tuesday [6 Sep 2011] would be needed to
absolutely confirm it as the infection.

The riding stable, which hosts about 70 horses, was immediately
quarantined, Wilson said. At least 3 other horses have come down with
the infection, which Wilson said is "similar to strep throat in
humans."

The disease is only fatal 1-2 percent of the time in horses and cannot
be transmitted to humans and thus poses no threat to them. "The people
here who know what's going on are all just handling it and helping out
and pitching in with cleaning and bleaching the barnyard down," said
Wilson, who owns several horses at the stable, one of which came down
with strangles.

"There seems to be a big hype about it from people who don't
understand what it is or are uneducated about that, but it seems like
we've caught this pretty early on," she added.

Wilson said the stable has separated 10 horses that may have been
exposed to strangles from the rest of the stabled animals. The
quarantine will be imposed for "at least 2 weeks" following the last
case of the infection. Animals tend to take "1-2 weeks" to rid
themselves of it, she said. No new animals will be admitted to the
stable, and no animals will be allowed to leave, Wilson said. However,
animals that appear healthy will be allowed to enter about 2 of the 18
miles of Brighton Recreation Area trails.

The 2-mile section between markers 9 and 17 will be restricted for the
time being for stable horses only, according to park supervisor Mike
Donnelly. It will be marked with tape, he said, so that other equine
trail riders know not to enter it.

"We will have one small section of loop trail that the stable uses for
their rides, and animals from the stable will be confined to that area
of trail," Donnelly said.

Strangles is a highly contagious upper respiratory tract infection
that leads to fever, heavy nasal discharge and swollen lymph nodes
resulting in pus discharges in the animal.

It is spread through the direct exposure to nasal discharge and pus of
afflicted animals. Though humans are not affected by the infection,
Wilson said they can help spread the disease by unknowingly moving the
infected animals' nasal and pus discharges.

Donnelly said this is the 1st time he's witnessed any kind of outbreak
of an infection or disease at the Brighton Recreation Area.

"Most people who own horses here are concerned by this, and we don't
want to minimize what has happened," he said. "At the same time, this
is not typically fatal to horses, and it is not transmittable to
humans."

Donnelly said they are still investigating how the infection entered
the Brighton Recreation Area's riding stable.

[Byline: Frank Konkel <fkonkel@gannett.com>]

--
Communicated by:
ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org>

[Strangles is caused by bacterial infection with _Streptococcus equi_
subspecies _equi_ (referred to as _S. equi_). The bacteria typically
infect the upper airway and lymph nodes of the head and neck. The
disease has been in the equine population for centuries, and was 1st
reported in 1251. The infection is highly contagious in horse
populations, particularly affecting young horses, and can recur on
farms with previous outbreaks of the disease.

Though strangles is highly contagious and can affect many horses on a
farm, most horses with infection recover without complication.
Complications from the infection include spread of the infection to
lymph nodes other than the head and neck (also known as metastatic
infection or bastard strangles), immune mediated disease (such as
purpura hemorrhagica), muscle disease and pain and lack of milk
production. Horses that develop complicated infections typically
require antibiotic and additional therapies based on veterinary
examination.

The hallmark clinical signs of infection are fever (temperature over
101.5 F), nasal discharge, and enlarged submandibular lymph nodes (in
the space between the lower jaw bones), which ultimately abscess.
Purulent nasal discharge is typically present, although it may
initially be clear. The retropharyngeal lymph nodes (located deep
behind the throatlatch) may also become enlarged and abscess. These
will sometimes drain into the guttural pouches, which are air-filled
spaces within the head that are an expansion of the Eustachian tubes.
Guttural pouch infection and pus accumulation (empyema) are often the
result of retropharyngeal lymph nodes that abscess and rupture into
the guttural pouches. Guttural pouch infection may also occur from
bacterial entrance through the pharynx (throat). Anorexia, depression,
and difficulty swallowing may also accompany signs of infection.

Nasal discharge from the infected horse is the largest source of
contamination. Sources of infection can be nose to nose contact with
an infected horse, sharing contaminated water buckets, feed tubs,
twitches, tack and clothing and equipment of handlers who work with
infected horses.

Once the horse comes into contact with a potential source of
infection, it may take 3-14 days after exposure before the horse will
show the 1st clinical sign of strangles (fever). Based on this
information, a minimum isolation period for introduction of new horses
to the farm should be 14 days.

Clinical signs of strangles are highly suggestive of the diagnosis.
There are 3 methods to confirm the diagnosis of strangles:

- Culture of the bacteria from the nasal discharge or abscess
- Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) that detects DNA of the _S. equi_
bacteria
- Blood test (serology) that measures a titer to a specific protein
(SeM) of _S. equi_.

Antibiotic therapy remains controversial for the treatment of
strangles. Complicated cases and those requiring tracheostomy for
management of respiratory distress generally do require antibiotic and
other supportive therapies. There is some evidence that treatment with
antibiotics (such as penicillin) at the 1st sign of fever and in
horses with no lymph node enlargement may prevent infection. However,
early antibiotic treatment will also prevent these cases from
developing immunity to the infection, and subsequently makes them
susceptible to reinfection sooner.

Vaccination is one method for prevention and control of infection with
_S. equi_. However, vaccination cannot guarantee disease prevention.
With strangles, vaccination will likely reduce the severity of disease
in the majority of horses that are infected. Available vaccines can be
administered by intramuscular and intranasal routes. Improper
administration of the vaccination can result in poor protection
against infection and/or complications at the site of injection;
therefore, administration by your veterinarian is recommended. The
intranasal vaccination results in the best local immunity.

Vaccination is generally not recommended during an outbreak of
strangles.

When an outbreak or potential outbreak occurs, it is important to work
with your veterinarian. Strangles is a reportable disease in some
states. Isolation of the affected animal or animals is important.
Other measures to take include taking the temperature of all horses on
the farm at least twice daily. Normal rectal temperature is 99-102 F.
Monitoring the rectal temperature and isolating horses at the 1st sign
of fever is one of the most effective ways to stop the spread of
infection. Infected horses can transmit the bacteria to healthy horses
1-2 days after they develop a fever.

Unexposed horses should be kept in a "clean" area and ideally should
have separate caretakers, cleaning equipment, grooming equipment,
water troughs and pasture. People and equipment can transfer the
infection from horse to horse. Extreme care, hand washing and
disinfection of supplies must be observed by everyone involved. If
different individuals cannot care for infected and healthy horses,
then healthy horses should always be dealt with 1st.

Portions of this comment were extracted from:
http://www.aaep.org/health_articles_view.php?id=323. - Mod.TG]
See Also
2009
----
Strangles equine - USA: (02) (IN) 20091008.3489
Strangles, equine - USA (IN) 20090913.3220
2008
----
Equine strangles - USA: (OH) 20080212.0562
2005
----
Strangles, equine - USA (DE) 20050531.1517
Strangles, equine - USA (multistate)(02): proposed rule, FL 20050407.0999
Strangles, equine - USA (multistate) 20050402.0950
Strangles, equine - USA (CA) 20050313.0739
.................................................sb/tg/msp/dk
</body>
